Subsequent vicissitudes
(sometimes accompanied by the abduction of his statue by invaders)
obscured Marduk’s status, but after the twelfth century BC it was usually
unquestioned. Meanwhile, Sumerian tradition remained alive well into the
first millennium BC in the use of Sumerian in the Babylonian liturgies, in the
names of the gods and the attributions they enjoyed. Babylonian cosmogony
began, like that of Sumer, with the creation of the world from watery waste
(the name of one god meant ‘silt’) and the eventual fabrication of Man as the
slave of the gods. In one version, gods turned men out like bricks, from clay
moulds. It was a world picture suited to absolute monarchy, where kings
exercised power like that of gods over the men who toiled to build their
palaces and sustained a hierarchy of officials and great men which mirrored
that of the heavens.
Hammurabi’s achievement did not long survive him. Events in northern
Mesopotamia indicated the appearance of a new power even before he
formed his empire. Hammurabi had overthrown an Amorite kingdom which
had established itself in Assyria at the end of the hegemony of Ur. This was a
temporary success. There followed nearly a thousand years during which
Assyria was to be a battleground and prize, eventually overshadowing a
Babylon from which it was separated; the centre of gravity of Mesopotamian

history had decisively moved northwards from old Sumer. The Hittites who
were establishing themselves in Anatolia in the last quarter of the third
millennium BC, were pushing slowly forwards in the next few centuries;
during this time they took up the cuneiform script, which they adapted to
their own Indo-European language. By 1700 BC they ruled the lands between
Syria and the Black Sea. Then, one of their kings turned southwards against
a Babylonia already weakened and shrunken to the old land of Akkad. His
successor carried the advance to completion; Babylon was taken and
plundered and Hammurabi’s dynasty and achievement finally came to an
end. But then the Hittites withdrew and other peoples ruled and disputed
Mesopotamia for a mysterious four centuries of which we know little except
that during them the separation of Assyria and Babylonia which was to be so
important in the next millennium was made final.
In 1162 BC the statue of Marduk was again taken away from Babylon by
Elamite conquerors. By that time, a very confused era has opened and the
focus of world history has shifted away from Mesopotamia. The story of the
Assyrian empire still lies ahead, but its background is a new wave of
migrations in the thirteenth and twelfth centuries BC which involve other
civilizations far more directly and deeply than the successors of the
Sumerians. Those successors, their conquerors and displacers, none the less
built on the foundations laid in Sumer. Technically, intellectually, legally,
theologically, the Near East, which by 1000 BC was sucked into the vortex of
world politics – the term is by then not too strong – still bore the stamp of
the makers of the first civilization. Their heritage would pass in strangely
transmuted forms to others in turn.

3
Ancient Egypt
Mesopotamia was not the only great river valley to cradle a civilization, but
the only early example to rival it in the antiquity and staying-power of what
was created was that of Egypt. For thousands of years after it had died, the
physical remains of the first civilization in the Nile valley fascinated men’s
minds and stirred their imaginations; even the Greeks were bemused by the
legend of the occult wisdom of a land where gods were half men, half beasts,
and people still waste their time trying to discern a supernatural significance
in the arrangement of the pyramids. Ancient Egypt has always been our
greatest visible inheritance from antiquity.
The richness of its remains is one reason why we know more about
Egyptian than about much of Mesopotamian history. In another way, too,
there is an important difference between these civilizations: because
Sumerian civilization appeared first, Egypt could benefit from its experience
and example. Exactly what this meant has been much debated.
Mesopotamian contributions have been seen in the motifs of early Egyptian
art, in the presence of cylinder seals at the outset of Egyptian records, in
similar techniques of monumental building in brick and in the debt of
hieroglyph, the pictorial writing of Egypt, to early Sumerian script. That
there were important and fruitful connections between early Egypt and
Mesopotamia seems incontestable, but how and why their first encounters
came about may never be known. The earliest archaeological evidence of
contact comes from the fourth millenium BC and when Sumerian influence
first came to bear it was probably by way of the peoples settled in the delta
of the Nile. It operated there at the very north of the feature which above all
differentiated Egypt’s history from that of any other centre of civilization,
the Nile itself, the heart of Egypt’s prehistory as of its history.
Egypt was defined by the Nile and the deserts which flanked it; it was the
country the river watered, one drawn-out straggling oasis. In prehistoric
times it must also have been one great marsh, 600 miles long, and, except in
the delta, never more than a few miles wide. From the start the annual floods

of the river were the basic mechanism of the economy and set the rhythm of
life on its banks. Farming gradually took root in the beds of mud deposited
higher and higher year by year, but the first communities must have been
precarious and their environment semi-aquatic; much of their life has been
irrecoverably swept away to the delta silt-beds. What remain of the earliest
times are things made and used by the peoples who lived on the edge of the
flood areas or on occasional rocky projections within it or at the valley sides.
Before 4000 BC they began to feel the impact of an important climatic
change. Sand drifted in from the deserts and desiccation set in. Armed with
elementary agricultural techniques, these people could move down to work
the rich soils of the flood-plain.
From the start, therefore, the river was the bringer of life to Egypt. It was
a benevolent deity whose never-failing bounty was to be thankfully received,
rather than the dangerous, menacing source of sudden, ruinous inundations
like those in which the men of Sumer struggled to make land out of a watery
waste. It was a setting in which agriculture (though introduced later than in
the Levant or Anatolia) gave a quick and rich return and perhaps made
possible a population ‘explosion’ which released its human and natural
resources. Although, as signs of contact in the fourth millennium BC show,
Sumerian experience may have been available as a fertilizing element, it
cannot be said that it was decisive; there always existed a potential for
civilization in the Nile valley and it may have needed no external stimulus to
discharge it. It is at least obvious, when Egyptian civilization finally
emerged, that it is unique, unlike anything we can find elsewhere.
The deepest roots of this civilization have to be pieced together from
archaeology and later tradition. They reveal settled peoples in Upper Egypt
(the south, that is, up the Nile) in Neolithic times. From about 5000 BC such
peoples were hunting, fishing, gathering crops and finally embarking on
purposeful cultivation in the valley. They lived in villages grouped around
market centres and seem to have belonged to clans which had animals as
symbols or totems; these they copied on their pottery. This was the basis of
the eventual political organization of Egypt which began with the emergence
of clan chiefs controlling the regions inhabited by their followers.
At an early stage these peoples already had several important
technological accomplishments to their credit, though they do not seem such
advanced farmers as those of other parts of the ancient Near East. They
knew how to make papyrus boats, how to work hard materials such as basalt,

and how to hammer copper into small articles for daily use. They were, that
is to say, pretty accomplished well before the dawn of written record, with
specialist craftsmen and, to judge by their jewels, well-marked distinctions
of class or status. Then, somewhere about the middle of the fourth
millennium, there is an intensification of foreign influences, apparent first in
the north, the delta. Signs of trade and contact with other regions multiply,
notably with Mesopotamia, whose influence is shown in the art of this era.
Meanwhile, hunting and occasional farming give way to a more intense
cultivation. In art, the bas-relief appears which is to be so important later in
the Egyptian tradition; copper goods become more plentiful. Everything
seems suddenly to be emerging at once, almost without antecedents, and to
this epoch belongs the basic political structure of the future kingdom.
It was twofold; at some time in the fourth millennium there solidified two
kingdoms, one northern, one southern, one of Lower and one of Upper
Egypt. This is interestingly different from Sumer; there were no city-states.
Egypt seems to move straight from precivilization to the government of
large areas. Egypt’s early ‘towns’ were the market-places of agriculturalists;
the agricultural communities and clans coalesced into groups which were the
foundation of later provinces. Egypt was to be a political entity 700 years
before Mesopotamia, but even later she would have only a restricted
experience of city life.
Of the kings of the two Egypts we know little until about 3200 BC, but we
may guess that they were the eventual winners in centuries of struggles to
consolidate power over larger and larger groups of people. It is about the
same time that the written record begins and this must have been important
in the consolidation of power. Because writing is already there at the
beginning of the Egyptian story, furthermore, something more like a
continuous historical account of the Egyptian civilization can be put together
than in the case of Sumer. In Egypt, writing was used from its first
appearance not merely as an administrative and economic convenience but
to record events on monuments and relics intended to survive.
In about 3200 BC, the records tell us, a great king of Upper Egypt, Menes,
conquered the north. Egypt was thus unified in a huge state 600 miles long,
running up the river as far as Abu Simbel. It was to be even bigger and to
extend even further up the great river which was its heart, and it was also to
undergo disruption from time to time, but this is effectively the beginning of
a civilization which was to survive into the age of classical Greece and

Rome. For nearly 3000 years – one and a half times the life of Christianity –
Egypt was a historical entity, for much of it a source of wonder and focus of
admiration. In so long a period much happened and we by no means know
all of it. Yet the stability and conservative power of Egyptian civilization are
more striking than its vicissitudes.
Roughly speaking, that civilization’s greatest days were over by about
1000 BC. Before that date, Egyptian history can most easily be visualized in
five big traditional divisions. Three of these are called respectively the Old,
Middle and New Kingdoms; they are separated by two others called the First
and Second Intermediate periods. Very roughly, the three ‘kingdoms’ are
periods of success or at least of consolidated government; the two
intermediate stages are interludes of weakness and disruption from external
and internal causes. The whole scheme can be envisaged as a kind of layer
cake, with three tiers of different flavours separated by two of somewhat
formless jam.
This is by no means the only way of understanding Egyptian history, nor
for all purposes the best. Many scholars prefer to set out ancient Egyptian
chronology in terms of thirty-one dynasties of kings, a system which has the
great advantage of being related to objective criteria; it avoids perfectly
proper but awkward disagreements about whether (for example) the first
dynasties should be put in the ‘Old Kingdom’ or distinguished as a separate
‘archaic’ period, or about the line to be drawn at the beginning or end of the
intermediate era. None the less, the five-part scheme is sufficient for our
purposes, if we also distinguish an archaic prelude. A recent dating
presentation and dynastic synchronization, is as follows:
Dynasties
I–II
Protodynastic c. 3000–2686 BC
III–VIII
Old Kingdom 2686–2160 BC
IX–XI
First Intermediate 2160–2055 BC
XII–XIV
Middle Kingdom 2055–1650 BC
XV–XVII Second Intermediate 1650–1550 BC
XVIII–XX New Kingdom 1550–1069 BC
This takes us down to the time at which, as in Mesopotamian history,
there is something of a break as Egypt is caught up in a great series of

upheavals originating outside its own boundaries to which the overworked
word ‘crisis’ can reasonably be applied. True, it is not until several more
centuries have passed that the old Egyptian tradition really comes to an end.
Some modern Egyptians insist on a continuing sense of identity among
Egyptians since the days of the Pharaohs. None the less, somewhere about
the beginning of the first millennium is one of the most convenient places at
which to break the story, if only because the greatest achievements of the
Egyptians were by then behind them.
These were above all the work of and centred in the monarchical state.
The state form itself was the expression of Egyptian civilization. It was
focused first at Memphis whose building was begun during the lifetime of
Menes and which was the capital of the Old Kingdom. Later, under the New
Kingdom, the capital was normally at Thebes, though there were also
periods of uncertainty about where it was. Memphis and Thebes were great
religious centres and palace complexes; they did not really progress beyond
this to true urbanism. The absence of cities earlier was politically important,
too. Egypt’s kings had not emerged like Sumer’s as the ‘big men’ in a city-
state community which originally deputed them to act for it. Nor were they
simply men who like others were subject to gods who ruled all men, great or
small. They were mediators between their subjects and unearthly powers.
The tension of palace with temple was missing in Egypt and when Egyptian
kingship emerges it is unrivalled in its claims. The Pharaohs were to be gods,
not servants of gods.
It was only under the New Kingdom that the title ‘pharaoh’ came to be
applied personally to the king. Before that it indicated the king’s residence
and his court. None the less, at a much earlier stage Egyptian monarchs
already had the authority which was so to impress the ancient world. It is
expressed in the exaggerated size with which they are depicted on the
earliest monuments. This they inherited ultimately from prehistoric kings
who had a special sanctity because of their power to assure prosperity
through successful agriculture. Such powers are attributed to some African
rainmaker-kings even today; in ancient Egypt they focused upon the Nile.
The Pharaohs were believed to control its annual rise and fall: life itself, no
less, to the riparian communities. The first rituals of Egyptian kingship
known to us are concerned with fertility, irrigation and land reclamation. The
earliest representations of Menes show him excavating a canal.

Under the Old Kingdom the idea appears that the king is the absolute lord
of the land. Soon he is venerated as a descendant of the gods, the original
lords of the land. He becomes a god, Horus, son of Osiris, and takes on the
mighty and terrible attributes of the divine maker of order; the bodies of his
enemies are depicted hanging in rows like dead gamebirds, or kneeling in
supplication lest (like less fortunate enemies) their brains be ritually dashed
out. Justice is ‘what Pharaoh loves’, evil ‘what Pharaoh hates’; he is divinely
omniscient and so needs no code of law to guide him. Later, under the New
Kingdom, the Pharaohs were to be depicted with the heroic stature of the
great warriors of other contemporary cultures; they are shown in their
chariots, mighty men of war, trampling down their enemies and confidently
slaughtering beasts of prey. Perhaps a measure of secularization can be
inferred in this change, but it does not remove Egyptian kingship from the
region of the sacred and awesome. ‘He is a god by whose dealings one lives,
the father and mother of all men, alone by himself, without an equal’, wrote
one of the chief civil servants of the Pharaoh as late as about 1500 BC. Until
the Middle Kingdom, only he had an afterlife to look forward to. Egypt,
more than any other Bronze Age state, always stressed the incarnation of the
god in the king, even when that idea was increasingly exposed by the
realities of life in the New Kingdom and the coming of iron. Then, the
disasters which befell Egypt at the hands of foreigners would make it
impossible to continue to believe that Pharaoh was god of all the world.
But long before this the Egyptian state had acquired another institutional
embodiment and armature, an elaborate and impressive hierarchy of
bureaucrats. At its apex were viziers, provincial governors and senior
officials who came mainly from the nobility; a few of the greatest among
these were buried with a pomp rivalling that of the Pharaohs. Less eminent
families provided the thousands of scribes needed to staff and service an
elaborate government directed by the chief civil servants. The ethos of this
bureaucracy can be sensed through the literary texts which list the virtues
needed to succeed as a scribe: application to study, self-control, prudence,
respect for superiors, scrupulous regard for the sanctity of weights,
measures, landed property and legal forms. The scribes were trained in a
special school at Thebes, where not only the traditional history and literature
and command of various scripts were taught, but, it seems, surveying,
architecture and accountancy also.

The bureaucracy directed a country most of whose inhabitants were
peasants. They cannot have lived wholly comfortable lives, for they
provided both the conscript labour for the great public works of the
monarchy and the surplus upon which a noble class, the bureaucracy and a
great religious establishment could subsist. Yet the land was rich and was
increasingly mastered with irrigation techniques established in a pre-dynastic
period (probably one of the earliest manifestations of the unsurpassed
capacity to mobilize collective effort which was to be one of the hallmarks
of Egyptian government). Vegetables, barley, emmer were the main crops of
the fields laid out along the irrigation channels; the diet they made possible
was supplemented by poultry, fish and game (all of which figure plentifully
in Egyptian art). Cattle were in use for traction and ploughing at least as
early as the Old Kingdom. With little change this agriculture remained the
basis of life in Egypt until modern times; it was sufficient to make her the
granary of the Romans.
On the surplus of this agriculture there also rested Egypt’s own
spectacular form of conspicuous consumption, a range of great public works
in stone unsurpassed in antiquity. Houses and farm buildings in ancient
Egypt were built in the mud brick already used before dynastic times: they
were not meant to outface eternity. The palaces, tombs and memorials of the
Pharaohs were a different matter; they were built of the stone abundantly
available in some parts of the Nile valley. Though they were carefully
dressed with first copper and then bronze tools and often elaborately incised
and painted, the technology of utilizing this material was far from
complicated. Egyptians invented the stone column, but their great building
achievement was not so much architectural and technical as social and
administrative. What they did was based on an unprecedented and almost
unsurpassed concentration of human labour. Under the direction of a scribe,
thousands of slaves and sometimes regiments of soldiers were deployed to
cut and manhandle into position the huge masses of Egyptian building. With
only such elementary assistance as was available from levers and sleds – no
winches, pulleys, blocks or tackle existed – and by the building of colossal
ramps of earth, a succession of still-startling buildings was produced.

 

They began under the Third Dynasty. The most famous are the pyramids,
the tombs of kings, at Saqqara, near Memphis. One of these, the ‘Step
Pyramid’, was traditionally seen as the masterpiece of the first architect
whose name is recorded – Imhotep, chancellor to the king. His work was so
impressive that he was later to be deified, as well as being revered as
physician, astronomer, priest and sage. The beginning of building in stone
was attributed to him and it is easy to believe that the building of something
so unprecedented as the 200-foot-high pyramid was seen as evidence of
godlike power. It and its companions rose without peer over a civilization
which until then lived only in dwellings of mud. A century or so later, blocks
of stone of fifteen tons apiece were used for the pyramid of Cheops or
Khufru, and it was at this time (during the Fourth Dynasty) that the greatest
pyramids were completed at Giza. Cheops’s pyramid was twenty years in the
building; the legend that 100,000 men were employed upon it is now thought
to be an exaggeration but many thousands must have been and the huge
quantities of stone (between five and six million tons) were brought from as
far as 500 miles away. This colossal construction is perfectly orientated and
its sides, 750 feet long, vary by less than eight inches – only about 0.09 per
cent. The pyramids later figured among the Seven Wonders of the World,
and they alone among those Wonders survive. They were the greatest
evidence of the power and self-confidence of the pharaonic state. Nor, of
course, were they the only great monuments of Egypt. Each of them was
only the dominant feature of a great complex of buildings which made up
together the residence of the king after death. At other sites there were great
temples, palaces, the tombs of the Valley of the Kings.
These huge public works were in both the real and figurative sense the
biggest things the Egyptians left to posterity. They make it less surprising
that the Egyptians were later also reputed to have been great scientists:
people could not believe that these huge monuments did not rest on the most
refined mathematical and scientific skills. Yet this is an invalid inference and
untrue. Though Egyptian surveying was highly skilled, it was not until
modern times that a more than elementary mathematical skill became
necessary to engineering; it was certainly not needed for the erection of the
pyramids. What was requisite was outstanding competence in mensuration
and the manipulation of certain formulae for calculating volumes and
weights, and this was as far as Egyptian mathematics went, whatever later
admirers believed. Modern mathematicians do not think much of the

Egyptians’ theoretical achievement and they certainly did not match the
Babylonians in this art. They worked with a decimal numeration which at
first sight looks modern, but it may be that their only significant contribution
to later mathematics was the invention of unit fractions.
No doubt a primitive mathematics is a part of the explanation of the
sterility of the Egyptians’ astronomical endeavours – another field in which
posterity, paradoxically, was to credit them with great things. Their
observations were accurate enough to permit the forecasting of the rise of the
Nile and the ritual alignment of buildings, it is true, but their theoretical
astronomy was left far behind by the Babylonians. The inscriptions in which
Egyptian astronomical science was recorded were to command centuries of
awed respect from astrologers, but their scientific value was low and their
predictive quality relatively short term. The one solid work which rested on
the Egyptians’ astronomy was the calendar. They were the first people to
establish the solar year of 365¼ days and they divided it into twelve months,
each of three ‘weeks’ of ten days, with five extra days at the end of the year
– an arrangement, it may be remarked, to be revived in 1793 when the
French revolutionaries sought to replace the Christian calendar by one more
rational.
The calendar, though it owed much to the observation of stars, must have
reflected also in its remoter origins observation of the great pulse at the heart
of Egyptian life, the flooding of the Nile. This gave the Egyptian farmer a
year of three seasons, each of approximately four months, one of planting,
one of flood, one of harvest. But the Nile’s endless cycle also influenced
Egypt at deeper levels.
The structure and solidity of the religious life of ancient Egypt greatly
struck other peoples. Herodotus believed that the Greeks had acquired the
names of their gods from Egypt; he was wrong, but it is interesting that he
should have thought so. Later, the cults of Egyptian gods were seen as a
threat by the Roman emperors; they were forbidden, but the Romans had
eventually to tolerate them, such was their appeal. Mumbo-jumbo and
charlatanry with an Egyptian flavour could still take in cultivated Europeans
in the eighteenth century; an amusing and innocent expression of the
fascination of the myth of ancient Egypt could still be seen in recent times in
the rituals of the Shriners, the fraternities of respectable American
businessmen who paraded about the streets of small towns on great
occasions improbably attired in fezzes and baggy trousers. There was,

indeed, a continuing vigour in Egyptian religion which, like other sides of
Egyptian civilization, long outlived the political forms that had sustained and
sheltered it.
Yet it remains something with which it is peculiarly difficult to come to
grips. Words like ‘vigour’ can be misleading; religion in ancient Egypt was
much more a matter of an all-pervasive framework, as much taken for
granted as the circulatory system of the human body, than of an independent
structure such as what later came to be understood as a church. There were,
of course, religious personnel, priesthoods associated with particular cults
and places, and already under the Old Kingdom some of their priests had
status sufficient to ensure their burial in expensive tombs. But their temples
were economic agencies and storage centres as well as the foci of cults, and
many priests both then and later were to combine their ritual duties with
those of scribes, administrators and royal bureaucrats. They were hardly
what later ages would think of as clergy.
Egyptian religion is best seen not as a dynamic, lively social force, but as
a way of dealing with reality by managing different parts of an unchanging
cosmos. Yet even to say that requires qualifications. We have to remember
that concepts and distinctions which we take for granted in assessing (and
even talking about) the mentalities of other ages did not exist for the men
whose minds we seek to penetrate. The boundary between religion and
magic, for example, hardly mattered for the ancient Egyptian, though he
might be well aware that each had its proper efficacy. It has been said that
magic was always present as a kind of cancer in Egyptian religion; the image
is too evaluative, but expresses the intimacy of the link. Another distinction
lacking to ancient Egypt was the one most of us make automatically between
the name and the thing. For the ancient Egyptian, the name was the thing;
the real object we separate from its designation was identical with it. So
might be other images. The Egyptians lived in symbolism as fishes do in
water, taking it for granted, and we have to break through the assumptions of
a profoundly unsymbolic culture to understand them.
A whole world view is therefore involved in appreciating the meaning and
role of religion in ancient Egypt. At the outset there is overwhelming
evidence of its importance; for almost the whole duration of their
civilization, the ancient Egyptians show a remarkably uniform tendency to
seek through religion a way of penetrating the variety of the flow of ordinary
experience so as to reach a changeless world most easily understood through

the life the dead lived there. Perhaps the pulse of the Nile is to be detected
here, too; each year it swept away and made new, but its cycle was ever
recurring, changeless, the embodiment of a cosmic rhythm. The supreme
change threatening men was death, the greatest expression of the decay and
flux which was their common experience. Egyptian religion seems from the
start obsessed with it: its most familiar embodiments, after all, are the
mummy and the grave-goods from funeral chambers preserved in our
museums. Under the Middle Kingdom it came to be believed that all men,
not just the king, could expect life in another world. Accordingly, through
ritual and symbol, through preparation of the case he would have to put to
his judges in the afterworld, a man might prepare for the afterlife with a
reasonable confidence that he would achieve the changeless well-being it
offered in principle. The Egyptian view of the afterlife was, therefore, unlike
the gloomy version of the Mesopotamians; men could be happy in it.
The struggle to assure this outcome for so many men across so many
centuries gives Egyptian religion a heroic quality. It is the explanation, too,
of the obsessively elaborate care shown in preparing tombs and conducting
the deceased to his eternal resting-place. Its most celebrated expression is the
building of the Pyramids and the practice of mummification. It took seventy
days to carry out the funerary rites and mummification of a king under the
Middle Kingdom.
The Egyptians believed that after death a man could expect judgement
before Osiris; if the verdict was favourable, he would live in Osiris’s
kingdom, if not, he was abandoned to a monstrous destroyer, part crocodile,
part hippopotamus. This did not mean, though, that in life human beings
need do no more than placate Osiris, for the Egyptian pantheon was huge.
About two thousand gods existed and there were several important cults.
Many of them originated in the prehistoric animal deities. Horus, the falcon
god, was also god of the dynasty and probably arrived with the mysterious
invaders of the fourth millennium BC. These animals underwent a slow but
incomplete humanization; artists stuck their animal heads on to human
bodies. Such totem-like creatures were rearranged in fresh patterns as the
Pharaohs sought through the consolidation of their cults to achieve political
ends. In this way the cult of Horus was consolidated with that of Amon-Re,
the sun-god, of whom the Pharaoh came to be regarded as the incarnation.
This was the official cult of the great age of pyramid-building and by no
means the end of the story. Horus later underwent another transformation, to

appear as the offspring of Osiris, the central figure of a national cult, and his
consort Isis. This goddess of creation and love was probably the most
ancient of all – her origins, like those of other Egyptian deities, go back to
the pre-dynastic era, and she is one development of the ubiquitous mother-
goddess of whom evidence survives from all over the Neolithic Near East.
She was long to endure, her image, the infant Horus in her arms, surviving
into the Christian iconography of the Virgin Mary.
Egyptian religion is immensely complicated. Different places had
different cults and there were even occasional variations of a doctrinal and
speculative kind. The most famous of these was the attempt of a fourteenth-
century pharaoh to establish the cult of Aton, another manifestation of the
sun, in which has been discerned the first monotheistic religion. Yet if there
is a recurring sense of a striving after synthesis, it is often the expression of
dynastic or political interest. Much of the history of Egyptian religion must
be, if we could only decipher it, the story of ebbings and flowings about the
major cults: politics, in fact, rather than religion.
Not only the pharaohs were interested. The institutions which maintained
these beliefs were in the hands of a hereditary priestly class, initiated into the
rituals to whose inner sancta the ordinary worshipper almost never
penetrated. The cult statues at the shrine of the temple were rarely seen
except by the priests. As time passed, they acquired important vested
interests in the popularity and well-being of their cults.
The gods loom large in the subject-matter of ancient Egyptian art, but it
contains much more besides. It was based on a fundamental naturalism of
representation which, however restrained by conventions of expression and
gesture, gives two millennia of classical Egyptian art at first a beautiful
simplicity and later, in a more decadent period, an endearing charm and
approachability. It permitted a realistic portrayal of scenes of everyday life.
The rural themes of farming, fishing and hunting are displayed in them;
craftsmen are shown at work on their products and scribes at their duties. Yet
neither content nor technique is in the end the most striking characteristic of
Egyptian art, but its recognizably continuous style. For some two thousand
years, artists were able to work satisfyingly within a classical tradition. Its
origins may owe something to Sumer and it showed itself later able to
borrow other foreign influences, yet the strength and solidity of the central
and native tradition never wavers. It must have been one of the most
impressive visual features of Egypt to a visitor in ancient times; what he saw

looked so much of a piece. If we exempt what was done in the Upper
Palaeolithic, of which we know so very little, it is the longest and strongest
continuous tradition in the whole history of art.
It did not prove to be transplantable. Perhaps the Greeks took the column
from ancient Egypt, where it had its origins in the mud-plastered bundle of
reeds of which a reminiscence survives in fluting. What is clear apart from
this is that although the monuments of Egypt continuously fascinated artists
and architects of other lands, the result, even when they exploited them
successfully for their own purposes, was always superficial and exotic.
Egyptian style never took root anywhere else; it pops up from time to time
down the ages as decoration and embellishment – fluted columns, sphinxes
and serpents on furniture, an obelisk here, a cinema there. Only one great
integral contribution was made by Egyptian art to the future, the
establishment – for the delineation of the huge incised and painted figures on
the walls of tombs and temples – of the classical canons of proportion of the
human body. These were to pass through the Greeks, and European artists
would still be fascinated by them as late as Leonardo, although by then the
contribution was theoretical, not stylistic.
Another great artistic achievement not confined to Egypt, though
exceptionally important there, was calligraphic. It seems that Egyptians
deliberately took the Sumerian invention of representing sounds rather than
things, but rejected cuneiform. They invented, instead, hieroglyphic writing.
Instead of the device of arranging the same basic shape in different ways
which had been evolved in Mesopotamia, they deliberately chose lifelike
little pictures or near-pictures. It was much more decorative than cuneiform,
but also much harder to master. The first hieroglyphs appear before 3000 BC;
the last example of which we know was written in AD 394. Nearly 4000
years is an impressively long life for a calligraphy. But the uninitiated could
still not read it for another fourteen and a half centuries after its
disappearance, until a French scholar deciphered the inscription on the
‘Rosetta stone’, brought back to France after its discovery by scientists
accompanying a French army in Egypt. None of the classical writers of
antiquity who wrote about Egypt ever learnt to read hieroglyph, it seems,
though enormous interest was shown in it. Yet it now seems likely that
hieroglyph had importance in world as well as in Egyptian history because it
was a model for Semitic scripts of the second millennium BC and thus came

to be a remote ancestor of the modern Latin alphabet, which has spread
around the world in our own times.
In the ancient world the ability to read hieroglyph was the key to the
position of the priestly caste and, accordingly, a closely guarded professional
secret. From pre-dynastic times it was used for historical record and as early
as the First Dynasty the invention of papyrus – strips of reed-pith, laid criss-
cross and pounded together into a homogeneous sheet – provided a
convenient medium for its multiplication. This invention had much greater
importance for the world than hieroglyph; cheaper than skin (from which
parchment was made) and more convenient (though more perishable) than
clay tablets or slates of stone, it was the most general basis of
correspondence and record in the Near East until well into the Christian era,
when the invention of paper reached the Mediterranean world from the Far
East (and even paper took its name from papyrus). Soon after the appearance
of papyrus, writers began to paste sheets of it together into a long roll: thus
the Egyptians invented the book, as well as the material on which it could
first be written and a script which is an ancestor of our own. It may be our
greatest debt to the Egyptians, for a huge proportion of what we know of
antiquity comes to us directly or indirectly via papyrus.
Undoubtedly, the rumoured prowess of her religious and magical
practitioners and the spectacular embodiment of a political achievement in
art and architecture largely explain Egypt’s continuing prestige. Yet if her
civilization is looked at comparatively, it seems neither very fertile nor very
responsive. Technology is by no means an infallible test – nor one easy to
interpret – but it suggests a people slow to adopt new skills, reluctant to
innovate once a creative jump had been made. Stone architecture was the
only major innovation for a long time after the coming of literacy. Though
papyrus and the wheel were known under the First Dynasty, Egypt had been
in contact with Mesopotamia for getting on for 2000 years before she
adopted the well-sweep, by then long in use to irrigate land in the other river
valley. Yet she invented the water-clock, whose basic mechanism was to
undergo millenia of elaboration in later civilizations.
Perhaps the weight of routine was insuperable, given the background of
the unchanging reassurance provided by the Nile. Though Egyptian art
records workmen organized in teams for the sub-division of manufacturing
processes down to a point which faintly suggests the modern factory, many
important devices came to Egypt only much later than elsewhere. There is

no solid evidence of the presence of the potter’s wheel before the Old
Kingdom; for all the skill of the goldsmith and coppersmith, bronze-making
does not appear until well into the second millennium BC and the lathe has to
wait for the Hellenistic age. The bow-drill was almost the only tool for the
multiplication and transmission of energy available to the mass of Egyptian
craftsmen.
Only in medicine is there indisputable originality and achievement and it
can be traced back at least as far as the Old Kingdom. By 1000 BC an
Egyptian pre-eminence in this art was internationally recognized. While
Egyptian medicine was never wholly separable from magic (magical
prescriptions and amulets survive in great numbers), it had an appreciable
content of rationality and pure empirical observation. It extended as far as a
knowledge of contraceptive techniques. Its indirect contribution to
subsequent history was great, too, whatever its efficiency in its own day;
much of our knowledge of drugs and of plants furnishing materia medica
was first established by the Egyptians and passed from them, eventually,
through the Greeks to the scientists of medieval Europe. It is a considerable
thing to have initiated the use of a remedy effective as long as castor oil.
What can be concluded from this about the health of the ancient Egyptians
is another matter. They do not seem to have been so worried about alcoholic
over-indulgence as the Mesopotamians, but it is not easy to infer anything
from that. Some scholars have said there was an exceptionally high rate of
infant mortality and hard evidence of a negative kind exists for some
diseases of adults; whatever the explanation, the many mummified bodies
surviving reveal no instance of cancer, rickets, or syphilis. On the other
hand, the debilitating disease called schistosomiasis, carried by blood flukes
and so prevalent in Egypt today, seems to have been well established already
in the second millennium. Of course, none of this throws much light on
ancient Egyptian medical practice. Nevertheless, Egypt provides our oldest
surviving medical treatises, and their evidence of prescriptions and
recommended cures suggests that Egyptian practitioners could offer a mixed
bag of remedies, no better and no worse than most of those deployed in other
great centres of civilization at any time before the present (it seems that
much emphasis was long laid on purging and enemas). Considerable
preservative skill was attributed to the practitioners of mummification,
though unjustifiably since the climate was on their side. Curiously, the
products of their art were later themselves regarded as of therapeutic value;

powdered mummy was for centuries a sovereign cure for many ills in
Europe. It is interesting, too, that Egyptians devised and used certain
rudimentary contraceptive techniques. Whether these had any efficacy in
reducing the risk of over-population and therefore of the likelihood of
infanticide remains wholly unknown and speculative.
Most Egyptians were peasants, a consequence of Egypt remaining less
urbanized than Mesopotamia. The picture of Egyptian life presented by its
literature and art reveals a population living in the countryside, using little
towns and temples as service centres rather than dwelling places. Egypt was
for most of antiquity a country of a few great cult and administrative centres
such as Thebes or Memphis and the rest nothing more than villages and
markets. Life for the poor was hard, but not unremittingly so. The major
burden must have been conscript labour services. When these were not
exacted by Pharaoh, then the peasant would have considerable leisure at
those times when he waited for the flooding Nile to do its work for him. The
agricultural base was rich enough, too, to sustain a complex and variegated
society with a wide range of craftsmen. About their activities we know more
than of those of their Mesopotamian equivalents, thanks to stone-carvings
and paintings. The great division of this society was between the educated,
who could enter the state service, and the rest. Slavery existed but, it
appears, was less fundamental an institution than the forced labour
demanded of the peasantry.
Tradition in later times remarked upon the seductiveness and accessibility
of Egyptian women. With other evidence it helps to give an impression of a
society in which women may have been more independent and perhaps
enjoyed higher status than elsewhere. Doubtless too much weight can be
given to an art which depicts court ladies clad in the fine and revealing
linens which the Egyptians came to weave, exquisitely coiffured and
jewelled, wearing the carefully applied cosmetics to whose provision
Egyptian commerce gave much attention. We should not lean too strongly on
this, but our impression of the way in which women of the Egyptian ruling
class were treated is important, and it is one of dignity and independence.
The Pharaohs and their consorts – and other noble couples – are sometimes
depicted, too, with an intimacy of mood found nowhere else in the art of the
ancient Near East before the first millennium BC and suggestive of a real
emotional equality; it can hardly be accidental that this is so.

The beautiful and charming women who appear in many of the paintings
and sculptures may reflect also the outcome of a certain political importance
for their sex which was lacking elsewhere. The throne theoretically and often
in practice descended through the female line. An heiress brought to her
husband the right of succession; hence there was much anxiety about the
marriage of princesses. Many royal marriages were of brother and sister,
without apparently unsatisfactory genetic effects; some Pharaohs married
their daughters, but perhaps to prevent anyone else marrying them rather
than to ensure the continuity of the divine blood (which could be achieved
through concubines). Such a standing must have made royal ladies
influential personages in their own right. Some exercised important power
and one even occupied the throne, being willing to appear ritually bearded
and in a man’s clothes, and taking the title of Pharaoh. True, it was an
innovation which seems not to have been wholly approved.
There is also much femininity about the Egyptian pantheon, notably in the
cult of Isis, which is suggestive. Literature and art stress a respect for the
wife and mother which goes beyond the confines of the circle of the
notabilities. Both love stories and scenes of family life reveal what was at
least thought to be an ideal standard for society as a whole and it emphasizes
a tender eroticism, relaxation and informality, and something of an
emotional equality of men and women. Some women were literate. There is
even an Egyptian word for a female scribe, and evidence of the existence of
two such has been found, but there were, of course, not many occupations
open to women except those of priestess or prostitute. If they were well-off,
however, they could own property and their legal rights seem in most
respects to have been akin to those of women in the Sumerian tradition. It is
not easy to generalize over so long a period as that of Egyptian civilization
but such evidence as we have from ancient Egypt leaves an impression of a
society with a potential for personal expression by women not found among
many later peoples until modern times.
So impressive is the solidity and material richness of Egyptian civilization
in retrospect, so apparently unchanging, that it is even more difficult than in
the case of Mesopotamia to keep in perspective its relations with the world
outside or the ebb and flow of authority within the Nile valley. There are
huge tracts of time to account for – the Old Kingdom alone, on the shortest
reckoning, has a history two and a half times as long as that of the United
States – and so much happened under the Old Kingdom that often no central

narrative is possible. It is hard to know what was going on and what was its
importance. For nearly a thousand years after Menes, Egypt’s history can be
considered in virtual isolation. It was to be looked back upon as a time of
stability when Pharaohs were impregnable. Yet under the Old Kingdom there
has been detected a decentralization of authority; provincial officers show
increasing importance and independence. The Pharaoh, too, still had to wear
two crowns and was twice buried, once in Upper and once in Lower Egypt;
this division was still real. Relations with neighbours were not remarkable,
though a series of expeditions was mounted against the peoples of Palestine
towards the end of the Old Kingdom. The First Intermediate period which
followed saw the position reversed and Egypt was invaded, rather than being
the invader. No doubt weakness and division helped Asian invaders to
establish themselves in the valley of the lower Nile; there is a strange
comment that ‘the high born are full of lamentation but the poor are
jubilant… squalor is throughout the land… strangers have come into Egypt’.
Rival dynasties appeared near modern Cairo; the grasp of Memphis flagged.
The next great period of Egyptian history was the Middle Kingdom,
effectively inaugurated by the powerful Amenemhet I who reunified the
kingdom from his capital at Thebes. For about a quarter-millennium after
2000 BC, Egypt enjoyed a period of recovery whose repute may owe much to
the impression (which comes to us through the records) of the horrors of the
Intermediate period. Under the Middle Kingdom there was a new emphasis
on order and social cohesion. The divine status of the Pharaoh subtly
changes: not only is he God, but it is emphasized that he is descended from
gods and will be followed by gods. The eternal order will continue unshaken
after bad times have made men doubt. It is certain, too, that there was
expansion and material growth. Great reclamation work was achieved in the
marshes of the Nile. Nubia, to the south, between the first and third
cataracts, was conquered and its gold-mines fully exploited. Egyptian
settlements were founded even further south, too, in what was later to be a
mysterious black African kingdom called Kush. Trade leaves more elaborate
traces than ever before and the copper mines of the Sinai were now exploited
again. Theological change also followed – there was something of a
consolidation of cults under the god Amon-Re which reflected political
consolidation. Yet the Middle Kingdom ended in political upheaval and
dynastic competition.

The Second Intermediate period of roughly two hundred years was
marked by another and far more dangerous incursion of foreigners. These
were the Hyksos, probably an Asian people using the military advantage of
the iron-fitted chariot to establish themselves in the Nile delta as overlords to
whom the Theban dynasties at times paid tribute. Not much is known about
them. Seemingly, they took over Egyptian conventions and methods, and
even maintained the existing bureaucrats at first, but this did not lead to
assimilation. Under the Eighteenth Dynasty, the Egyptians evicted the
Hyksos in a war of peoples; this was the start of the New Kingdom, whose
first great success was to follow up victory in the years after 1570 BC by
pursuing the Hyksos into their strongholds in south Canaan. In the end, the
Egyptians occupied much of Syria and Palestine.
The New Kingdom in its prime was internationally so successful and has
left such rich physical memorials that it is difficult not to think that the
Hyksos domination must have had a cathartic or fertilizing effect. There was
under the Eighteenth Dynasty almost a renaissance of the arts, a
transformation of military techniques by the adoption of Asiatic devices such
as the chariot, and, above all, a huge consolidation of royal authority. It was
then that a female, Hatshepsut, for the first time occupied the throne in a
reign notable for the expansion of Egyptian commerce, or so her mortuary
temple seems to show. The next century or so brought further imperial and
military glory, with Hatshepsut’s consort and successor, Thotmes III,
carrying the limits of Egyptian empire to the Euphrates. Monuments
recording the arrival of tribute and slaves, and marriages with Asiatic
princesses testify to an Egyptian pre-eminence matched at home by a new
richness of decoration in the temples and the appearance of a sculpture in the
round, which produced busts and statues generally regarded as the peak of
Egyptian artistic achievement. Foreign influences also touched Egyptian art
at this time; they came from Crete.
Towards the end of the New Kingdom, the evidence of multiplied foreign
contacts begins to show something else: the context of Egyptian power had
already changed importantly. The crucial area was the Levant coast which
even Thotmes III had taken seventeen years to subdue. He had to leave
unconquered a huge empire ruled by the Mitanni, a people who dominated
eastern Syria and northern Mesopotamia. His successors changed tack. A
Mitanni princess married a pharaoh and to protect Egyptian interests in this
area the New Kingdom came to rely on the friendship of her people. Egypt

was being forced out of the isolation which had long protected her. But the
Mitanni were under growing pressure from the Hittites, to the north, one of
the most important of the peoples whose ambitions and movements break up
the world of the Near East more and more in the second half of the second
millennium BC.
We know a lot about the preoccupations of the New Kingdom at an early
stage in this process because they are recorded in one of the earliest
collections of diplomatic correspondence, for the reigns of Amenhotep III
and IV (c. 1400–1362 BC). Under the first of these kings, Egypt reached its
peak of prestige and prosperity. It was the greatest era of Thebes. Amenhotep
was fittingly buried there in a tomb which was the largest ever prepared for a
king, though nothing of it remains but the fragments of the huge statues the
Greeks later called the colossi of Memnon (a legendary hero, whom they
supposed to be Ethiopian).
Amenhotep IV succeeded his father in 1379 BC. He attempted a religious
revolution, the substitution of a monotheistic cult of the sun-god Aton for the
ancient religion. To mark his seriousness, he changed his name to Akhnaton
and founded a new city at Amarna, 300 miles north of Thebes, where a
temple with a roofless sanctuary open to the sun’s rays was the centre of the
new religion. Although there can be no doubt of Akhnaton’s seriousness of
purpose and personal piety, his attempt must have been doomed from the
start, given the religious conservatism of Egypt, and there may have been
political motives for his persistence. Perhaps he was trying to recover power
usurped by the priests of Amon-Re. Whatever the explanation, the
opposition Akhnaton provoked by this religious revolution helped to cripple
him on other fronts. Meanwhile, Hittite pressure was producing clear signs
of strain in the Egyptian dependencies; Akhnaton could not save the Mitanni
who lost all their lands west of the Euphrates to the Hittites in 1372 and
dissolved in civil war which foreshadowed their kingdom’s disappearance
thirty years or so later. The Egyptian sphere was crumbling. There were
other motives, perhaps, than religious outrage for the later exclusion of
Akhnaton’s name from the official list of kings.
His successor bore a name which is possibly the most widely known of
those from ancient Egypt. Amenhotep IV had changed his own name to
Akhnaton because he wished to erase the reminiscence of the cult of the old
god Amon; his successor and son-in-law changed his name from
Tutankhaton to Tutankhamon to mark the restoration of the old cult of Amon

and the collapse of the attempted religious reform. It may have been
gratitude for this that led to the magnificent burial in the Valley of the Kings,
which was given to Tutankhamon after only a short and otherwise
unremarkable reign.
When he died, the New Kingdom had two centuries of life ahead, but their
atmosphere is one of only occasionally interrupted and steadily accelerating
decline. Symptomatically, Tutankhamon’s widow arranged to marry a Hittite
prince (though he was murdered before the ceremony could take place).
Later kings made efforts to recover lost ground and sometimes succeeded;
the waves of conquest rolled back and forth over Palestine and at one time a
pharaoh took a Hittite princess as a bride as his predecessors had taken
princesses from other peoples. But there were yet more new enemies
appearing; even a Hittite alliance was no longer a safeguard. The Aegean
was in uproar, the islands ‘poured out their people all together’ and ‘no land
stood before them’, say the Egyptian records. These sea peoples were
eventually beaten off, but the struggle was hard.
There followed at some time during these years an episode of huge
importance for the future whose exact nature and historicity cannot be
established. According to their religious texts compiled many centuries later,
a small Semitic people, called by the Egyptians ‘Hebrews’, left the delta and
followed their leader Moses out of Egypt into the deserts of Sinai. From
about 1150 BC the signs of internal disorganization, too, are plentiful. One
king, Rameses III, died as a result of a conspiracy in the harem; he was the
last to achieve some measure of success in offsetting the swelling tide of
disaster. We hear of strikes and economic troubles under his successors;
there is the ominous symptom of sacrilege in a generation of looting of the
royal tombs at Thebes. The pharaoh is losing his power to priests and
officials and the last of the Twentieth Dynasty, Rameses XI, was in effect a
prisoner in his own palace. The age of Egypt’s imperial power was over. So
in fact was that of the Hittites, and of other empires of the end of the second
millennium. Not only Egypt’s unquestioned power, but the world which was
the setting of her glories, was passing away.
Undoubtedly, it is in changes affecting the whole ancient world that much
of the explanation of the decline of Egypt must be sought, yet it is
impossible to resist the feeling that the last centuries of the New Kingdom
expose weaknesses present in Egyptian civilization from the beginning.
These are not easy to discern at first sight; the spectacular heritage of

Egypt’s monuments and a history counted not in centuries but in millennia
stagger the critical sense and stifle scepticism. Yet the creative quality of
Egyptian civilization seems, in the end, strangely to miscarry. Colossal
resources of labour are massed under the direction of men who, by the
standards of any age, must have been outstanding civil servants, and the end
is the creation of the greatest tombstones the world has ever seen.
Craftsmanship of exquisite quality is employed, and its masterpieces are
grave-goods. A highly literate élite, utilizing a complex and subtle language
and a material of unsurpassed convenience, uses them copiously, but has no
philosophical or religious idea comparable to those of Greek or Jew to give
to the world. It is difficult not to sense an ultimate sterility, a nothingness, at
the heart of this glittering tour de force.
In the other scale must be placed the sheer staying-power of ancient
Egyptian civilization; after all, it worked for a very long time, a spectacular
fact. Though it underwent at least two phases of considerable eclipse, it
recovered from them, seemingly unchanged. Survival on such a scale is a
great material and historical success; what remains obscure is why it should
have stopped there. Egypt’s military and economic power in the end made
little permanent difference to the world. Her civilization was never
successfully spread abroad. Perhaps this is because its survival owed much
to its setting. If it was a positive success to create so rapidly institutions
which with little fundamental change could last so long, this could probably
have been done by any ancient civilization enjoying such a degree of
immunity from intrusion. China was to show impressive continuity, too.
It is important also to remember once more how slow and imperceptible
all social and cultural change was in early times. Because we are used to
change, we must find it difficult to sense the huge inertia possessed by any
successful social system (one, that is, which enables men to grapple
effectively with their physical and mental environment) in almost any age
before the most recent. In the ancient world the sources of innovation were
far fewer and far more occasional than now. The pace of history is rapid in
ancient Egypt if we think of prehistoric times; it seems glacially slow if we
reflect how little the daily life of Egyptians must have changed between
Menes and Thotmes III, a period of more than fifteen hundred years and
therefore comparable to that which separates us from the end of Roman
Britain. Marked change could only come from sudden and overwhelming
natural disaster (and the Nile was a reliable safeguard), or invasion or

conquest (and Egypt long stood at the edge of the battleground of peoples in
the Near East, affected only occasionally by their comings and goings). Only
very slowly could technology or economic forces exert such pressures for
change as we take for granted. As for intellectual stimuli, these could hardly
be strong in a society where the whole apparatus of a cultural tradition was
directed to the inculcation of routine.
In reflecting on the nature of Egyptian history, there is always a
temptation to revert in the end to the great natural image of the Nile always
physically present to Egyptian eyes. It was so prominent, perhaps, that it
could not be seen for the colossal and unique influence it was, for no context
broader than its valley needed consideration. While in the background the
incomprehensible (but in the end world-shaping) wars of the Fertile Crescent
rage across the centuries, the history of Old Egypt goes on for thousands of
years, virtually a function of the remorseless, beneficent flooding and
subsidence of the Nile. On its banks a grateful and passive people gathers the
richness it bestows. From it could be set aside what they thought necessary
for the real business of living: the proper preparation for death.

4
Intruders and Invaders:
The Dark Ages of the Ancient Near East
Mesopotamia and Egypt are the foundation stones of written history. For a
long time the first two great centres of civilization dominate chronology and
may conveniently be dealt with more or less in isolation. But obviously their
story is not the whole story of the ancient Near East, let alone that of the
ancient world. Soon after 2000 BC the movements of other peoples were
already breaking it up into new patterns. A thousand years later, other centres
of civilization were in existence elsewhere and we are well into the historical
era.
Unfortunately for the historian, there is no simple and obvious unity to
this story even in the Fertile Crescent, which for a long time continued to
show more creativity and dynamism than any other part of the world. There
is only a muddle of changes whose beginnings lie far back in the second
millennium and which go on until the first of a new succession of empires
emerges in the ninth century 
BC. The sweeping upheavals and
rearrangements which stud this confusion are hard even to map in outline, let
alone to explain; fortunately, their details do not need to be unravelled here.
History was speeding up and civilization was providing men with new
opportunities. Rather than submerge ourselves in the flood of events, we can
more usefully try to grasp some of the change-making forces at work.
A COMPLICATING WORLD
The most obvious of these forces for change continue to be great migrations.
Their fundamental pattern does not change much for a thousand years or so
after 2000 BC, nor does the ethnic cast of the drama. The basic dynamic was
provided by the pressure of peoples of Indo-European linguistic stocks on
the Fertile Crescent from both east and west. Their variety and numbers
grow but their names need not be remembered here even if some of them
bring us to the remote origins of Greece. Meanwhile, Semitic peoples

dispute with the Indo-Europeans the Mesopotamian valleys; with Egypt and
the mysterious ‘Peoples of the Sea’ they fight over Sinai, Palestine and the
Levant. Another group of northerners establishes itself in Iran – and from it
will eventually come the greatest of all the empires of the ancient past, that
of sixth-century Persia. Still another branch of these peoples pushes out into
India. These movements must explain much of what lies behind a shifting
pattern of empires and kingdoms stretching across the centuries. By the
standards of modern times some of them were quite long-lived; from about
1600 BC a people called Kassites from Caucasia ruled in Babylon for four
and a half centuries, which is a duration comparable to that of the entire
history of British overseas empire. Yet, by the standards of Egypt such
polities are the creatures of a moment, born today and swept away tomorrow.
It would indeed be surprising if they had not proved fragile in the end, for
many other new forces were also at work which multiplied the revolutionary
effects of the wanderings of peoples. One of them which has left deep traces
is improvement in military technique. Fortification and, presumably, siege-
craft had already reached a fairly high level in Mesopotamia by 2000 BC.
Among the Indo-European peoples who nibbled at the civilization these
skills protected were some with recent nomadic origins; perhaps for that
reason they were able to revolutionize warfare in the field, though they long
remained unskilled in siege-craft. Their introduction of the two-wheeled war
chariot and the cavalryman transformed operations in open country. The
soldiers of Sumer are depicted trundling about in clumsy four-wheeled carts,
drawn by asses; probably these were simply a means of moving generals
about or getting a leader into the mêlée, so that spear and axe could be
brought to bear. The true chariot is a two-wheeled fighting vehicle drawn by
horses, the usual crew being two, one man driving, the other using it as a
platform for missile weapons, especially the composite bow formed of strips
of horn. The Kassites were probably the first people to exploit the horse in
this way and their rulers seem to have been of Indo-European stock. Access
to the high pastures to the north and east of the Fertile Crescent opened to
them a reserve of horses in the lands of the nomads. In the river valleys
horses were at first rare, the prized possessions of kings or great leaders, and
the barbarians therefore enjoyed a great military and psychological
superiority. Eventually, though, chariots were used in the armies of all the
great kingdoms of the Near East; they were too valuable a weapon to be
ignored. When the Egyptians expelled the Hyksos, they did so by, among

other things, using this weapon against those who had conquered them with
it.
Warfare was changed by riding horses, too. A cavalryman proper not only
moves about in the saddle but fights from horseback; it took a long time for
this art to be developed, for managing a horse and a bow or a spear at the
same time is a complex matter. Horse-riding came from the Iranian
highlands, where it may have been practised as early as 2000 BC. It spread
through the Near East and Aegean well before the end of the next
millennium. Later, after 1000 BC, there appeared the armoured horseman,
charging home and dominating foot-soldiers by sheer weight and impetus.
This was the beginning of a long era in which heavy cavalry were a key
weapon, though their full value could only be exploited centuries later, when
the invention of the stirrup gave the rider real control of his horse.
During the second millennium BC chariots came to have parts made of
iron; soon they had hooped wheels. The military advantages of this metal are
obvious and it is not surprising to find its uses spreading rapidly through the
Near East and far beyond, in spite of attempts by those who had iron to
restrict it. At first, these were the Hittites. After their decline iron-working
spread rapidly, not only because it was a more effective metal for making
arms, but because iron ore, though scarce, was more plentiful than copper or
tin. It was a great stimulus to economic as well as military change. In
agriculture, iron-using peoples could till heavy soils which had remained
impervious to wood or flint. But there was no rapid general transfer to the
new metal; iron supplemented bronze, as bronze and copper had
supplemented stone and flint in the human tool kit, and did so in some places
more rapidly than others. Already in the eleventh century BC iron was used
for weaponry in Cyprus (some have argued that steel was produced there,
too) and from that island iron spread to the Aegean soon after 1000 BC. That
date can serve as a rough division between the Bronze and Iron Ages, but is
no more than a helpful prop to memory. Though iron implements became
more plentiful after it, parts of what we may call the ‘civilized world’ went
on living in a Bronze Age culture. Together with the ‘Neolithic’ elsewhere,
the Bronze Age lives on well into the first millennium BC, fading away only
slowly like the smile on the face of the Cheshire cat. For a long time, after
all, there was very little iron to go round.
Metallurgical demand helps to explain another innovation, a new and
increasingly complex inter-regional and long-distance trade. It is one of

those complicating inter-reactions which seem to be giving the ancient world
a certain unity just before its disruption at the end of the second millennium
BC. Tin, for example, so important a commodity, had to be brought from
Mesopotamia and Afghanistan, as well as Anatolia, to what we should now
call ‘manufacturing’ centres. The copper of Cyprus was another widely
traded commodity and the search for more of it gave Europe, at the margins
of ancient history though she was, a new importance. Mine-shafts in what
was to be Yugoslavia were sunk sixty and seventy feet below ground to get
at copper even before 4000 BC. Perhaps it is not surprising that some
European peoples later came to display high levels of metallurgical skill,
notably in the beating of large sheets of bronze and in the shaping of iron (a
much more difficult material to work than bronze until temperatures high
enough to cast it were available).
Long-range commerce turns on transport. At first, the carriage of goods
was a matter of asses and donkeys; the domestication of camels in the
middle of the second millennium BC made possible the caravan trade of Asia
and the Arabian peninsula which was later to seem to be of ageless antiquity,
and opened an environment hitherto almost impenetrable, the waterless
desert. Except among nomadic peoples, wheeled transport probably had only
local importance, given the poor quality of early roads. Early carts were
drawn by oxen or asses; they may have been in service in Mesopotamia
about 3000 BC, in Syria around 2250 BC, in Anatolia two or three hundred
years later and in mainland Greece about 1500 BC.
For goods in quantity, water transport was already likely to be cheaper and
simpler than transport by land; this was to be a constant of economic life
until the coming of the steam railway. Long before caravans began to bring
up to Mesopotamia and Egypt the gums and resins of the south Arabian
coasts, ships were carrying them up the Red Sea and merchants were moving
back and forth in trading vessels across the Aegean. Understandably, it was
in maritime technology that some of the most important advances in
transport were made.
We know that Neolithic peoples could make long journeys by sea in dug-
out canoes and there is even some evidence of navigation from the seventh
millennium. The Egyptians of the Third Dynasty had put a sail on a sea-
going ship; the central mast and square sail were the beginning of
seamanship relying on anything but human energy. Improvements of rigging
came slowly over the next two millennia. It has been thought that these made

some approach to the fore-and-aft rigging which was necessary if ships were
to sail closer to the wind, but for the most part the ships of antiquity were
square-rigged. Because of this, the direction of prevailing winds was
decisive in setting patterns of sea-borne communication. The only other
source of energy was human: the invention of the oar is an early one and it
provided the motive power for long sea crossings as well as for close
handling. It seems likely, though, that oars were used more frequently in
warships, and sail in what it is at a very early date possible to call
merchantmen. By the thirteenth century BC, ships capable of carrying more
than 200 copper ingots were sailing about the eastern Mediterranean, and
within a few centuries more, some of these ships were being fitted with
watertight decks.
Even in recent times goods have been exchanged or bartered and no doubt
this was what trade meant for most of antiquity. Yet a great step was taken
when money was invented. This seems to have happened in Mesopotamia,
where values of account were being given in measures of grain or silver
before 2000 BC. Copper ingots seem to have been treated as monetary units
throughout the Mediterranean in the late Bronze Age. The first officially
sealed means of exchange which survives comes from Cappadocia in the
form of ingots of silver of the late third millennium BC: this was a true metal
currency. Yet although money is an important invention and one which was
to spread, we have to wait until the eighth century BC for the Assyrians to
have a silver standard for the first coins. Refined monetary devices (and
Mesopotamia had a credit system and bills of exchange in early times) may
help to promote trade, but they are not indispensable. Peoples in the ancient
world could get along without them. The Phoenicians, a trading people of
legendary skill and acumen, did not have a currency until the sixth century
BC; Egypt, a centrally controlled economy and of impressive wealth, did not
adopt a coinage until two centuries after that, and Celtic Europe, for all its
trade in metal goods, did not coin money until two centuries later still.
Meanwhile, men exchanged goods without money, though it is hard to be
sure quite what this means. Although there was an important rise in the
volume of goods moved about the world, by 1000 BC or so, not all of this
was what would now be termed ‘trade’. Economic organization in ancient
times is for a long time very obscure. Any specialized function – pottery-
making, for example – implies a machinery which on the one hand
distributes its products and, on the other, ensures subsistence to the specialist

by redistributing to him and his fellows the food they need to survive, and
perhaps other goods. But this does not require ‘trade’, even in the form of
barter. Many peoples in historic times have been observed operating such
distribution through their chiefs: these men presided over a common store,
‘owning’, in a sense, everything the community possessed, and doling out
such shares from it as were required to keep society working smoothly. This
may be what lay behind the centralization of goods and supplies in Sumerian
temples; it would also explain the importance of the recording and sealing of
consignments deposited there and hence the early association of writing with
accounting.
As for economic exchange between communities, confident generalization
about its earliest stages is even more hazardous. Once into the era of
historical record, we can see many activities going on which involve the
transfer of commodities, not all of them aimed at monetary gain. Payment of
tribute, symbolic or diplomatic gifts between rulers, votive offerings, were
some of the forms it took. We should not rush to be over-definite; right down
to the nineteenth century AD the Chinese empire conceived its foreign trade
in terms of tribute from the outside world and the pharaohs had a way of
translating trade with the Aegean into similar notions, to judge by tomb
paintings. In the ancient world, such transactions might include the transfer
of standard objects such as tripods or vessels of a certain weight or rings of
uniform size which therefore present at an early date some of the
characteristics of currency. Sometimes such things were useful; sometimes
they were merely tokens. All that is wholly certain is that the movement of
commodities increased and that much of this increase in the end took the
form of the profitable exchanges we now think of as commerce.
New towns must have helped such changes. They sprang up all over the
old Near East, no doubt in part because of population growth. They register
the successful exploitation of agricultural possibilities but also a growing
parasitism. The literary tradition of the alienation of countrymen from the
city is already there in the Old Testament. Yet city life also offered a new
intensity of cultural creativity, a new acceleration of civilization of which
one sign is the spreading of literacy. In about 2000 BC, literacy was still
largely confined to the river-valley civilizations and the areas they
influenced. Cuneiform had spread throughout Mesopotamia where two or
three languages were written in it; in Egypt the monumental inscriptions
were hieroglyphic and day-to-day writing was done on papyrus in a

simplified form called hieratic. A thousand years or so later, the picture had
changed. Literate peoples were then to be found all over the Near East, and
in Crete and Greece, too. Cuneiform had been adapted to yet more languages
with great success; even the Egyptian government adopted it for its
diplomacy. Other scripts were being invented, too. One, in Crete, takes us to
the edge of modernity, for it reveals a people in about 1500 BC whose
language was basically Greek. With the adoption of a Semitic alphabet, the
Phoenician, the medium of the first western literature was in existence by
about 800 BC, and so, perhaps, was its first surviving expression, in what
were later called the works of Homer.
Such themes make nonsense of chronology; they register changes lost to
sight if history is pinned too closely to specific countries. Yet individual
countries and their peoples, though subject to general forces and in more and
more frequent contact, also become increasingly distinct. Literacy pins down
tradition; in its turn, tradition expresses communal self-consciousness.
Presumably tribes and peoples have always felt their identity; such
awareness is much strengthened when states take on more continuing and
institutionalized forms. The dissolution of empires into more viable units is a
familiar story from Sumer to modern times, but some areas emerge time and
time again as enduring nuclei of tradition. Even in the second millennium
BC, states are getting more solid and show greater staying power. They were
still far from achieving that extensive and continuing control of their peoples
whose possibilities have only fully been revealed in modern times. Yet even
in the most ancient records there seems to be an unchecked trend towards a
greater regularity in government and greater institutionalizing of power.
Kings surround themselves with bureaucracies and tax-collectors find the
resources for larger and larger enterprises. Law becomes a widely accepted
idea; wherever it penetrates, there is a limitation, even if at first only
implicit, of the power of the individual and an increase of that of the law-
giver. Above all, the state expresses itself in military power; the problem of
feeding, equipping and administering standing professional armies is solved
by 1000 BC.
When such things happen, the story of governmental and social
institutions begins to escape from the general categories of early civilization.
In spite of a new cosmopolitanism made possible by easier intercourse and
cross-fertilizing, societies take very diverse paths. In the life of the mind, the
most conspicuous expression of diversity is religion. While some have

discerned in the pre-classical era a tendency towards simpler, monotheistic
systems, the most obvious fact is a huge and varied pantheon of local and
specialized deities, mostly coexisting tolerantly, with only an occasional
indication that one god is jealous of his distinction.
There is a new scope for differentiation in other expressions of culture,
too. Before civilization began, art had already established itself as an
autonomous activity not necessarily linked to religion or magic (often so
linked though it continued to be). The first literature has already been
mentioned and of other sides of the mind we also begin to see something.
There is the possibility of play; gaming-boards appear in Mesopotamia,
Egypt, Crete. Perhaps men were already gambling.
