Not surprisingly, then, agriculture began in more than one place and in different
forms. It has been claimed that the earliest instance, based on the cultivation
of primitive forms of millet and rice, occurred in south-east Asia, somewhere
about 10,000 BC. Yet for thousands of years, and until only a couple of
centuries ago, the increase of human food supply was to come from methods
already available, though only slowly discovered, and in rudimentary form,
in prehistoric times. New land could be broken in for crops, elementary
observation and selection began the conscious modification of species, plant
forms were transferred to new locations, and labour was applied to

cultivation through digging, draining and irrigating. These made possible a
growth in food production which could sustain a slow and steady rise in
human numbers until the great changes brought by chemical fertilizers and
modern genetic science.
The accidents of survival and the direction of scholarly effort have meant
until recently that much more was known about early agriculture in the Near
East than about its possible precursors in further Asia. Rice may have been
cultivated in the Yangtze valley as early as 7000 BC. None the less, there is
good reason to regard the Near East as a crucial zone. Both the predisposing
conditions and the evidence point to the region later called the ‘Fertile
Crescent’ as especially significant; this is the arc of territory running
northwards from Egypt through Palestine and the Levant, through Anatolia
to the hills between Iran and the south Caspian to enclose the river valleys of
Mesopotamia. Much of it now looks very different from the same area’s lush
landscape when the climate was at its best, five thousand or so years ago.
Wild barley and a wheatlike cereal then grew in southern Turkey and emmer,
a wild wheat, in the Jordan valley. Egypt enjoyed enough rain for the
hunting of big game well into historical times, and elephants were still to be
found in Syrian forests in 1000 BC. The region today is still fertile by
comparison with the deserts which encircle it, but in prehistoric times it was
even more favoured. The cereal grasses which are the ancestors of later
crops have been traced back furthest in these lands. There is evidence of the
harvesting, though not necessarily of the cultivating, of wild grasses in Asia
Minor in about 9500 BC. There, too, the afforestation which followed the end
of the last Ice Age seems to have presented a manageable challenge;
population pressure might well have stimulated attempts to extend living-
space by clearing and planting when hunting-gathering areas became
overcrowded. From this region the new foods and the techniques for planting
and harvesting them seem to have spread into Europe in about 7000 BC.
Within the region, of course, contacts were relatively easier than outside it; a
date as early as 8000 BC has been given to discoveries of bladed tools found
in south-west Iran but made from obsidian which came from Anatolia. But
diffusion need not have been the only process at work. Agriculture later
appeared in the Americas, seemingly without any import of techniques from
outside.

The jump from gathering wild cereals to planting and harvesting them
seems marginally greater than that from driving game for hunting to herding,
but the domestication of animals was almost as momentous. The first traces
of the keeping of sheep come from northern Iraq, in about 9000 BC. Over
such hilly, grassy areas the wild forebears of the Jersey cow and the
Gloucester Old Spot pig roamed untroubled for thousands of years except by
occasional contact with their hunters. Pigs, it is true, could be found all over
the Old World, but sheep and goats were especially plentiful in Asia Minor
and a region running across much of Asia itself. From their systematic
exploitation would follow the control of their breeding and other economic
and technological innovations. The use of skins and wool opened new
possibilities; the taking of milk launched dairying. Riding and the use of
animals for traction would come later. So would domestic poultry.
The story of mankind is now far past the point at which the impact of such
changes can be easily grasped. Suddenly, with the coming of agriculture, the
whole material fabric on which subsequent human history was to be based
flashes into view, though not yet into existence. It was the beginning of the
greatest of man’s transformations of the environment. In a hunting-gathering
society thousands of acres are needed to support a family, whereas in
primitive agricultural society about twenty-five acres is enough. In terms of
population growth alone, a huge acceleration became possible. An assured or
virtually assured food surplus also meant settlements of a new solidity.
Bigger populations could live on smaller areas and true villages could
appear. Specialists not engaged in food production could be tolerated and fed
more easily while they practised their own skills. Before 9000 BC there was a
village (and perhaps a shrine) at Jericho. A thousand years later it had grown
to some eight to ten acres of mud-brick houses with substantial walls.
It is a long time before we can discern much of the social organization and
behaviour of early farming communities. It seems possible that at this time,
as much as at any other, local divisions of mankind were decisively
influential. Physically, humanity was more uniform than ever, but culturally
it was diversifying as it grappled with different problems and appropriated
different resources. The adaptability of different branches of Homo sapiens
in the conditions left behind after the retreat of the last Ice Age is very
striking and produced variations in experience unlike those following earlier
glaciations. They lived for the most part in isolated, settled traditions, in
which the importance of routine was overwhelming. This would give new

stability to the divisions of culture and race which had appeared so slowly
throughout Palaeolithic times. It would take much less time in the historical
future which lay ahead for these local peculiarities to crumble under the
impact of population growth, speedier communication and the coming of
trade – a mere ten thousand years, at most. Within the new farming
communities it seems likely that distinctions of role multiplied and new
collective disciplines had to be accepted. For some people there must have
been more leisure (though for others actually engaged in the production of
food, leisure may well have diminished). It certainly seems likely that social
distinctions became more marked. This may be connected with new
possibilities as surpluses became available for barter which led eventually to
trade.
The same surpluses may also have encouraged humanity’s oldest sport
after hunting – warfare. Hunting was long to be the sport of kings, and
mastery of the animal world was an attribute of the first heroes of whose
exploits we have records in sculpture and legend. Yet the possibility of
human and material prizes must have made raids and conquest more
tempting. Perhaps, too, a conflict, which was to have centuries of vitality
before it, finds its origins here – that between nomads and settlers. Political
power may have an origin in the need to organize protection for crops and
stock from human predators. We may even speculate that the dim roots of
the notion of aristocracy are to be sought in the successes (which must have
been frequent) of hunter-gatherers, representatives of an older social order,
in exploiting the vulnerability of the settlers, tied to their areas of cultivation,
by enslaving them. None the less, though the just prehistoric world must
have been lawless and brutal, it is worth remembering that there was an
offsetting factor: the world was still not very full. The replacement of hunter-
gatherers by farmers did not have to be a violent process. The ample space
and thin populations of Europe on the eve of the introduction of farming
may explain the lack of archaeological evidence of struggle. It was only
slowly that growing populations and pressure on the new farming resources
increased the likelihood of competition.
In the long run metallurgy changed things as much as did farming, but it
was to be a very much longer run. Immediately, it made a less rapid and
fundamental difference. This is probably because the deposits of ore first
discovered were few and scattered: for a long time there was just not much
metal around. The first of whose use we find evidence is copper (which

rather weakens the attractiveness of the old term ‘Bronze Age’ for the
beginning of metal-using culture). At some time between 6000 and 7000 BC
it was first being hammered into shape without heating and then smelted at
Çatal Hüyük, in Anatolia, though the earliest known metal artifacts date
from about 4000 BC and are beaten copper pins found in Egypt. Once the
technique of blending copper with tin to produce bronze was discovered, a
metal was available which was both relatively easy to cast and retained a
much better cutting edge. It was in use in Mesopotamia soon after 3000 BC.
On bronze much was to be built; from it, too, much derived, among other
results the quite new importance of ore-bearing areas. In its turn, this was to
give a new twist to trade, to markets and to routes. Still further
complications, of course, followed the coming of iron, which appeared after
some cultures had indisputably evolved into civilizations – another reflection
of the way in which the historical and prehistoric eras run so untidily into
one another. Its obvious military value springs to the eye, but it had just as
much importance when turned into agricultural tools. This is looking a long
way ahead, but it made possible a huge extension of living space and food-
producing soil: however successfully he burned woodland and scrub,
Neolithic man could only use a stone adze or scratch at heavy soils with an
antler or wooden pick. Turning them over and digging deep began to be
possible only when the invention of ploughing (in the Near East in about
3000 BC) brought animal muscle-power to the assistance of humans, and
when iron tools became common.
It is already clear how quickly – the term is legitimate against the
background of earlier prehistory even if it takes thousands of years in some
places – interpenetration and interplay begin to influence the pace and
direction of change. Long before these processes have exhausted their
effects in some areas, too, the first civilizations are in being. Prehistorians
used to argue whether innovations were diffused from a single source or
appeared spontaneously and independently in different places, but so
complex a background has made this seem a waste of time and energy. Both
views, if put forward in an unqualified way, seem untenable. To say that in
one place, and in one place only, all the conditions for the appearance of new
phenomena existed and that these were then simply diffused elsewhere is as
implausible as saying that in widely differing circumstances of geography,
climate and cultural inheritance exactly the same inventions could be thrown
up, as it were, time and time again. What we can observe is a concentration

of factors in the Near East which made it at one crucial moment
immeasurably the most evident, active and important centre of new
developments. It does not mean that similar individual developments may
not have occurred elsewhere: pottery, it seems, was first produced in Japan
in about 10,000 BC, and agriculture evolved in America perhaps as early as
5000 BC in complete isolation from the Old World.
This means that human prehistory comes to an end in a ragged, untidy
way; once again, there is no neat dividing line from history. At the end of
prehistory and on the eve of the first civilizations we confront a world of
human societies more differentiated than ever before and more successful
than ever in mastering different environments and surviving. Some will
continue into history. It is only within the last century or so that the Ainus of
northern Japan have disappeared, taking with them a life that is said to have
been very similar to one they lived fifteen thousand years ago. Englishmen
and Frenchmen who went to North America in the sixteenth century AD
found hunter-gatherers there who must have lived much as their own
ancestors had done ten thousand years before. Plato and Aristotle were to
live and die before prehistory in America gave way to the appearance of the
great Maya civilization of Yucatán, and prehistory lasted for Eskimos and
Australian aborigines until the nineteenth century.
No crude divisions of chronology, therefore, will help in unravelling so
interwoven a pattern. But its most important feature is clear enough: by 6000
or 5000 BC, there existed in at least one area of the Old World all the
essential constituents of civilized life. Their deepest roots lay hundreds of
thousands of years further back, in ages dominated by the slow rhythm of
genetic evolution. Through the Upper Palaeolithic eras the pace of change
had quickened by a huge factor as culture slowly became more important,
but this was as nothing to what was to follow. Civilization was to bring
conscious attempts on a quite new scale to control and organize men and
their environment. It builds on a basis of cumulative mental and
technological resources and the feedback from its own transformations
further accelerates the process of change. Ahead lies faster development in
every field, in the technical control of environment, in the elaboration of
mental patterns, in the changing of social organization, in the accumulation
of wealth, in the growth of population.
It is important to get our perspective in this matter right. From some
modern points of view the centuries of the European Middle Ages look like a

long slumber. No medievalist would agree, of course, but a twentieth-
century man who is impressed by the rapidity of the change which
encompasses him and the relative immobility of medieval society ought to
reflect that the art which develops from the Romanesque of Charlemagne’s
Aachen to the Flamboyant of fifteenth-century France was revolutionized in
five or six centuries; in a period about ten times as long, the first known art,
that of Upper Palaeolithic Europe, shows, by comparison, insignificant
stylistic change. Further back, the pace is even slower as the long persistence
of early tool types shows. Still more fundamental changes are even less easy
to comprehend. So far as we know, the last twelve thousand years register
nothing new in human physiology comparable to the colossal
transformations of the early Pleistocene which are registered for us in a
handful of fossil relics of a few of nature’s experiments, yet those took
hundreds of thousands of years.
In part, the contrast in the rate of change is the one with which we began,
that between Nature and Man as makers of change. Mankind increasingly
chooses for itself, and even in prehistory the story of change is therefore
increasingly one of conscious adaptation. So the story will continue into
historical times, more intensively still. This is why the most important part
of the human story is the story of consciousness; when, long ago, it broke the
genetic slow march, it made everything else possible. Nature and nurture are
there from the moment that human beings are first identifiable; perhaps they
can never be quite disentangled, but man-made culture and tradition are
increasingly the determinants of change.
Two reflections ought, none the less, to be made to balance this
indisputable fact. The first is that our species has almost certainly not shown
any improvement in innate capacity since the Upper Palaeolithic. Human
physique has not changed fundamentally in forty thousand years or so and it
would be surprising if raw human mental capacity had done so. So short a
time could hardly suffice for genetic changes comparable to those of earlier
eras. The rapidity with which humanity has achieved so much since
prehistoric times can be accounted for quite simply: there are many more of
us upon whose talents humanity can draw and, more important still, human
achievements are essentially cumulative. They rest upon a heritage itself
accumulating at, as it were, compound interest. Primitive societies had far
less inherited advantage in the bank. This makes the magnitude of their
greatest steps forward all the more amazing.

If this is speculative, the second reflection need not be: his genetic
inheritance not only enables Homo sapiens to make conscious change, to
undertake an unprecedented kind of evolution, but also controls and limits
him. The irrationalities of this century show the narrow limits of our
capacity for conscious control of our destiny. To this extent, we are still
determined, still unfree, still a part of a nature which produced our unique
qualities in the first place only by evolutionary selection. It is not easy to
separate this part of our inheritance, either, from the emotional shaping the
human psyche has received from the processes through which it has evolved.
That shaping still lies deep at the heart of all our aesthetic and affective life.
Man must live with an in-built dualism. To deal with it has been the aim of
most of the great philosophies and religions and the mythologies by which
we still live, but they are themselves moulded by it. As we move from
prehistory to history it is important not to forget that its determining effect
still proves much more resistant to control than those blind prehistoric forces
of geography and climate which were so quickly overcome. Nevertheless, at
the edge of an opening history we already encounter a creature we know –
Man the change-maker.

BOOK TWO
The First Civilizations
Ten thousand years ago, the physical shape of the world was much what it is
today. The outlines of the continents were broadly those we know and the
major natural barriers and channels of communication have remained
constant ever since. By comparison with the upheavals of the hundreds of
millennia preceding the end of the last Ice Age, climate, too, was from this
time stable; from this point the historian need only regard its short-term
fluctuations. Ahead there lay the age (in which we still live) in which most
change was going to be man-made.
Civilization has been one of the great accelerators of such change. It
began at least seven times according to one historian, meaning by that that
he could distinguish at least seven occasions on which particular mixes of
human skills and natural facts came together to make possible a new order
of life based on the exploitation of nature. Though all these beginnings fell
within a span of three thousand years or so – barely a moment by
comparison with the vast scale of prehistory – they were neither
simultaneous, nor equally successful. They turned out very differently, some
of them racing ahead to lasting achievements while others declined or
disappeared, even if after spectacular flowerings. Yet all of them signified an
increase in the rate and scale of change dramatic by comparison with
anything achieved in earlier times.
Some of these early civilizations are still real foundations of our own
world. Some of them, on the other hand, now exercise little or no influence,
except perhaps upon our imaginations and emotions when we contemplate
the relics which are all that is now left of them. None the less, together they
determined much of the cultural map of the world down to this day because
of the power of the traditions which sprang from them even when their
achievements in ideas, social organization or technology had long been
forgotten. The establishment of the first civilizations took place between
about 3500 BC and 500 BC and provides the first of the major chronological
divisions of world history.

1
Early Civilized Life
For as long as we know there has been at Jericho a never-failing spring,
feeding what is still a sizeable oasis. No doubt it explains why people have
lived there on and off for about ten thousand years. Farmers clustered about
it in late prehistoric times; its population may then have numbered two or
three thousand. Before 6000 BC it had great water tanks which suggest
provision for big needs, possibly for irrigation, and there was a massive
stone tower which was part of elaborate defences long kept in repair. Clearly
its inhabitants thought they had something worth defending; they had
property. Jericho was a considerable place.
For all that, it was not the beginnings of a civilization; too much was still
lacking and it is worth considering for a moment at the outset of the era of
civilization just what it is we are looking for. It is a little like the problem of
pinning down in time the first human beings. There is a shaded area in which
we know the change occurs, but we can still disagree about the point at
which a line has been crossed. All over the Near East around 5000 BC
farming villages provided the agricultural surpluses on which civilization
could eventually be raised. Some of them have left behind evidence of
complex religious practice and elaborate painted pottery, one of the most
widespread forms of art in the Neolithic era. Somewhere about 6000 BC
brick building was going on in Turkey at Çatal Hüyük, a site only slightly
younger than Jericho. But by civilization we usually mean something more
than ritual, art or the presence of a certain technology, and certainly
something more than the mere agglomeration of human beings in the same
place.
It is a little like speaking of ‘an educated man’: everyone can recognize
one when they see him, but not all educated men are recognized as such by
all observers, nor is a formal qualification (a university degree, for example)
either a necessary or infallible indicator. Dictionary definitions are of no help
in pinning down ‘civilization’, either. That of the Oxford English Dictionary
is indisputable but so cautious as to be useless: ‘a developed or advanced

state of human society’. What we have still to make up our minds about is
how far developed or advanced and along what lines.
Some have said that a civilized society is different from an uncivilized
society because it has a certain attribute – writing, cities, monumental
building have all been suggested. But agreement is difficult and it seems
safer not to rely on any such single test. If, instead, we look at examples of
what everyone has agreed to call civilizations and not at the marginal and
doubtful cases, then it is obvious that what they have in common is
complexity. They have all reached a level of elaboration which allows much
more variety of human action and experience than even a well-off primitive
community. Civilization is the name we give to the interaction of human
beings in a very creative way, when, as it were, a critical mass of cultural
potential and a certain surplus of resources have been built up. In civilization
this releases human capacities for development at quite a new level and in
large measure the development which follows is self-sustaining. This is
somewhat abstract and it is time to turn to examples.
Somewhere in the fourth millennium BC is the starting-point of the story
of civilizations and it will be helpful to set out a rough chronology. We begin
with the first recognizable civilization in Mesopotamia. The next example is
in Egypt, where civilization is observable at a slightly later date, perhaps
about 3100 BC. Another marker in the Near East is ‘Minoan’ civilization
which appears in Crete in about 2000 BC, and from that time we can
disregard questions of priorities in this part of the world: it is already a
complex of civilizations in interplay with one another. Meanwhile, further
east and perhaps around 2500 BC, another civilization has appeared in India
and it is to some degree literate. China’s first civilization starts later, towards
the middle of the second millennium BC. Later still come the meso-
Americans. Once we are past about 1500 BC, though, only this last example
is sufficiently isolated for interaction not to be a big part of explaining what
happens. From that time, there are no civilizations to be explained which
appear without the stimulus, shock or inheritance provided by others which
have appeared earlier. For the moment, then, our preliminary sketch is
complete enough at this point.
About these first civilizations (whose appearance and shaping is the
subject-matter of the next few chapters) it is very difficult to generalize. Of
course they all show a low level of technological achievement, even if it is
astonishingly high by comparison with that of their uncivilized predecessors.

To this extent their shape and development were still determined much more
than those of our own civilization by their setting. Yet they had begun to
nibble at the restraints of geography. The topography of the world was
already much as it is today; the continents were set in the forms they now
have and the barriers and channels to communication they supplied were to
be constants, but there was a growing technological ability to exploit and
transcend them. The currents of wind and water which directed early
maritime travel have not changed much, and even in the second millennium
BC men were learning to use them and to escape from their determining
force.
This suggests, correctly, that at a very early date the possibilities of human
interchange were considerable. It is therefore unwise to dogmatize about
civilization appearing in any standard way in different places. Arguments
have been put forward about favourable environments, river valleys for
example: obviously, their rich and easily cultivated soils could support fairly
dense populations of farmers in villages which would slowly grow into the
first cities. This happened in Mesopotamia, Egypt, the Indus valley and
China. But cities and civilizations have also arisen away from river valleys,
in Meso-America, Minoan Crete and, later, in Greece. With the last two,
there is the strong likelihood of important influence from the outside, but
Egypt and the Indus valley, too, were in touch with Mesopotamia at a very
early date in their evolution. Evidence of such contact led at one time to the
view put forward a few years ago that we should look for one central source
of civilization from which all others came. This is not now very popular.
There is not only the awkward case of civilization in the isolated Americas
to deal with, but great difficulty in getting the timetable of the supposed
diffusion right, as more and more knowledge of early chronology is acquired
by the techniques of radio-carbon dating.
The most satisfactory answer appears to be that civilization was likely
always to result from the coming together of a number of factors
predisposing a particular area to throw up something dense enough to be
recognized later as civilization, but that different environments, different
influences from outside and different cultural inheritances from the past
mean that men did not move in all parts of the world at the same pace or
even towards the same goals. The idea of a standard pattern of social
‘evolution’ was discredited even before the idea of ‘diffusion’ from a
common civilizing source. Clearly, a favourable geographical setting was

essential; in the first civilizations everything rested on the existence of an
agricultural surplus. But another factor was just as important – the capacity
of the peoples on the spot to take advantage of an environment or rise to a
challenge, and here external contacts may be as important as tradition. China
seems at first sight almost insulated from the outside, but even there
possibilities of contact existed. The way in which different societies generate
the critical mass of elements necessary to civilization therefore remains very
hard to pin down.
It is easier to say something generally true about the marks of early
civilization than about the way it happened. Again, no absolute and universal
statements are plausible. Civilizations have existed without writing, useful as
it is for storing and using experience. More mechanical skills have been very
unevenly distributed, too: the meso-Americans carried out major building
operations with neither draught animals nor the wheel, and the Chinese knew
how to cast iron nearly fifteen hundred years before Europeans. Nor have all
civilizations followed the same patterns of growth; there are wide disparities
between their staying-power, let alone their successes.
None the less, early civilizations, like later ones, seem to have a common
positive characteristic in that they change the human scale of things. They
bring together the cooperative efforts of more men and women than in
earlier societies and usually do this by physically bringing them together in
larger agglomerations, too. Our word ‘civilization’ suggests, in its Latin
roots, a connection with urbanization. Admittedly, it would be a bold man
who was willing to draw a precise line at the moment when the balance
tipped from a dense pattern of agricultural villages clustered around a
religious centre or a market to reveal the first true city. Yet it is perfectly
reasonable to say that more than any other institution the city has provided
the critical mass which produces civilization and that it has fostered
innovation better than any other environment so far. Inside the city the
surpluses of wealth produced by agriculture made possible other things
characteristic of civilized life. They provided for the upkeep of a priestly
class which elaborated a complex religious structure, leading to the
construction of great buildings with more than merely economic functions,
and eventually to the writing down of literature. Much bigger resources than
in earlier times were thus allocated to something other than immediate
consumption and this meant a storing of enterprise and experience in new

forms. The accumulated culture gradually became a more and more effective
instrument for changing the world.
One change is quickly apparent: in different parts of the world men grew
more unlike one another. The most obvious fact about early civilizations is
that they are startlingly different in style, but because it is so obvious we
usually overlook it. The coming of civilization opens an era of ever more
rapid differentiation – of dress, architecture, technology, behaviour, social
forms and thought. The roots of this obviously lie in prehistory, when there
already existed men with different lifestyles, different patterns of existence,
different mentalities, as well as different physical characteristics. But this
was no longer merely the product of the natural endowment as environment,
but of the creative power of civilization itself. Only with the rise to
dominance of Western technology in the twentieth-century has this variety
begun to diminish. From the first civilizations to our own day there have
always been alternative models of society available, even if they knew little
of one another.
Much of this variety is very hard to recover. All that we can do in some
instances is to be aware that it is there. At the beginning there is still little
evidence about the life of the mind except institutions so far as we can
recover them, symbols in art and ideas embodied in literature. In them lie
presuppositions which are the great coordinates around which a view of the
world is built – even when the people holding that view do not know they
are there (history is often the discovery of what people did not know about
themselves). Many such ideas are irrecoverable, and even when we can
begin to grasp the shapes which defined the world of men living in the old
civilizations, a constant effort of imagination must be made to avoid the
danger of falling into anachronism which surrounds us on every side. Even
literacy does not reveal very much of the minds of creatures so like and yet
so unlike ourselves.
It is in the Near East that the stimulating effects of different cultures upon
one another first become obvious and no doubt it is much of the story of the
appearance of the earliest civilizations there. A turmoil of racial comings and
goings for three or four thousand years both enriched and disrupted this area,
where our history must begin. The Fertile Crescent was to be for most of
historic times a great crucible of cultures, a zone not only of settlement but
of transit, through which poured an ebb and flow of people and ideas. In the

end this produced a fertile interchange of institutions, language and belief
from which stems much of human thought and custom even today.
Why this began to happen cannot exactly be explained, but the
overwhelming presumption must be that the root cause was over-population
in the lands from which the intruders came. Over-population may seem a
paradoxical notion to apply to a world whose whole population in about
4000 BC has been estimated only at between eighty and ninety millions – that
is, about the same as Germany’s today. In the next four thousand years it
grew by about 50 per cent to about one hundred and thirty millions; this
implies an annual increase almost imperceptible by comparison with what
we now take for granted. It shows both the relative slowness with which our
species added to its power to exploit the natural world and how much and
how soon the new possibilities of civilization had already reinforced man’s
propensity to multiply and prosper by comparison with prehistoric times.
Such growth was still slight by later standards because it was always
based on a very fragile margin of resources and it is this fragility which
justifies talk of over-population. Drought or desiccation could dramatically
and suddenly destroy an area’s capacity to feed itself and it was to be
thousands of years before food could easily be brought from elsewhere. The
immediate results must often have been famine, but in the longer run there
were others more important. The disturbances which resulted were the prime
movers of early history; climatic change was still at work as a determinant,
though now in much more local and specific ways. Droughts, catastrophic
storms, even a few decades of marginally lower or higher temperatures,
could force peoples to get on the move and so help to bring on civilization
by throwing together peoples of different tradition. In collision and
cooperation they learnt from one another and so increased the total potential
of their societies.

 

The peoples who are the actors of early history in the Near East all
belonged to the light-skinned human family (sometimes confusingly termed
Caucasian) which is one of the three major ethnic classifications of the
species Homo sapiens (the others being Negroid and Mongoloid). Linguistic
differences have led to other attempts to distinguish them. All the peoples in
the Fertile Crescent of early civilized times have been assigned on
philological gounds either to ‘Hamitic’ stocks who evolved in Africa north
and north-east of the Sahara, to ‘Semitic’ language speakers of the Arabian
peninsula, to peoples of ‘Indo-European’ language who, from southern
Russia, had spread also by 4000 BC into Europe and Iran, or to the true
‘Caucasians’ of Georgia. These have been identified as the dramatis
personae of early Near Eastern history. Their historic centres all lay around
the zone in which agriculture and civilization appear at an early date. The
wealth of so well-settled an area must have attracted peripheral peoples.
By about 4000 BC most of the Fertile Crescent was occupied and we can
begin there to attempt a summary of the next three thousand years which
will provide a framework for the earlier civilizations. Probably Semitic
peoples had already begun to penetrate it by then; their pressure grew until
by the middle of the third millennium BC (long after the appearance of
civilization) they would be well established in central Mesopotamia, across
the middle sections of the Tigris and Euphrates. The interplay and rivalry of
the Semitic peoples with the Caucasians, who were able to hang on to the
higher lands which enclosed Mesopotamia from the north-east, is one
continuing theme some scholars have discerned in the early history of the
area. By 2000 BC the peoples whose languages were of the Indo-European
group have also entered on the scene, and from two directions. One of these
peoples, the Hittites, pushed into Anatolia from Europe, while their advance
was matched from the east by that of the Iranians. Between 2000 BC and
1500 BC branches of these sub-units dispute and mingle with the Semitic and
Caucasian peoples in the Crescent itself, while the contacts of the Hamites
and Semites lie behind much of the political history of old Egypt. This
scenario is, of course, highly impressionistic. Its value is only that it helps to
indicate the basic dynamism and rhythms of the history of the ancient Near
East. Much of its detail is still highly uncertain (as will appear) and little can
be said about what maintained this fluidity. None the less, whatever its
cause, this wandering of peoples was the background against which the first
civilization appeared and prospered.

2
Ancient Mesopotamia
The best case for the first appearance of something which is recognizably
civilization has been made for the southern part of Mesopotamia, the 700-
mile-long land formed by the two river valleys of the Tigris and Euphrates.
This end of the Fertile Crescent was thickly studded with farming villages in
Neolithic times. Some of the oldest settlements of all seem to have been in
the extreme south where deposits from centuries of drainage from up-
country and annual floodings had built up a soil of great richness. It must
always have been much easier to grow crops there than elsewhere, provided
that the water supply could be made continuously and safely available; this
was possible, for though rain was slight and irregular, the river bed was often
above the level of the surrounding plain. A calculation has been made that in
about 2500 BC the yield of grain in southern Mesopotamia compared
favourably with that of the best Canadian wheat-fields today. Here, at an
early date, was the possibility of growing more than was needed for daily
consumption, the surplus indispensable to the appearance of town life.
Furthermore, fish could be taken from the nearby sea.
Such a setting was a challenge, as well as an opportunity. The Tigris and
Euphrates could suddenly and violently change their beds: the marshy, low-
lying land of the delta had to be raised above flood level by banking and
ditching and canals had to be built to carry water away. Thousands of years
later, techniques could still be seen in use in Mesopotamia, which were
probably those first employed long ago to form the platforms of reed and
mud on which were built the first homesteads of the area. These patches of
cultivation would be grouped where the soil was richest. The drains and
irrigation channels they needed could be managed properly only if they were
managed collectively. No doubt the social organization of reclamation was
another result. However it happened, the seemingly unprecedented
achievement of making land from watery marsh must have been the forcing
house of a new complexity in the way men lived together.

As the population rose, more land was taken to grow food. Sooner or later
men of different villages would have come face to face with others intent on
reclaiming marsh which had previously separated them from one another.
Different irrigation needs may even have brought them into contact before
this. There was a choice: to fight or to cooperate. Each meant further
collective organization and a new agglomeration of power. Somewhere
along this path it made sense for men to band together in bigger units than
hitherto for self-protection or management of the environment. One physical
result is the town, mud-walled at first to keep out floods and enemies, raised
above the waters on a platform. It was logical for the local deity’s shrine to
be the place chosen: he stood behind the community’s authority. It would be
exercised by his chief priest, who became the ruler of a little theocracy
competing with others.
Something like this – we cannot know what – may explain the difference
between southern Mesopotamia in the third and fourth millennia BC and the
other zones of Neolithic culture with which it had already been long in
contact. The evidence of pottery and characteristic shrines shows that there
were links between Mesopotamia and the Neolithic cultures of Anatolia,
Assyria and Iran. They all had much in common. But only in one relatively
small area did a pattern of village life common to much of the Near East
begin to grow faster and harden into something else. From that background
emerges the first true urbanism, that of Sumer, and the first observable
civilization.
Sumer is an ancient name for southern Mesopotamia, which then extended
about a hundred miles less to the south than the present coast. The people
who lived there may have been Caucasians, unlike their Semitic neighbours
to the south-west and like their northern neighbours, the Elamites, who lived
on the other side of the Tigris. Scholars are still divided about when the
Sumerians – that is, those who spoke the language later called Sumerian –
arrived in the area: they may have been there since about 4000 BC. But since
we know the population of civilized Sumer to be a mixture of races, perhaps
including the earlier inhabitants of the region, with a culture which mixed
foreign and local elements, it does not much matter.
Sumerian civilization had deep roots. The people had long shared a way
of life not very different from that of their neighbours. They lived in villages
and had a few important cult centres which were continuously occupied. One
of these, at a place called Eridu, probably originated in about 5000 BC. It

grew steadily well into historic times and by the middle of the fourth
millennium there was a temple there which some have thought to have
provided the original model for Mesopotamian monumental architecture,
though nothing is now left of it but the platform on which it rested. Such cult
centres began by serving those who lived near them. They were not true
cities, but places of devotion and pilgrimage. They may have had no
considerable resident populations, but they were usually the centres around
which cities later crystallized and this helps to explain the close relationship
religion and government always had in ancient Mesopotamia. Well before
3000 BC some such sites had very big temples indeed; at Uruk (which is
called Erech in the Bible) there was an especially splendid one, with
elaborate decoration and impressive pillars of mud brick, eight feet in
diameter.
Pottery is among the most important evidence linking pre-civilized
Mesopotamia with historic times. It provides one of the first clues that
something culturally important is going forward which is qualitatively
different from the evolutions of the Neolithic. The so-called Uruk pots (the
name is derived from the site where they were found) are often duller, less
exciting than earlier ones. They are, in fact, mass-produced, made in
standard form on a wheel (which first appears in this role). The implication
of this is strong that when they came to be produced there already existed a
population of specialized craftsmen; it must have been maintained by an
agriculture sufficiently rich to produce a surplus exchanged for their
creations. It is with this change that the story of Sumerian civilization can
conveniently be begun.
It lasts about thirteen hundred years (roughly from 3300 to 2000 BC),
which is about as much time as separates us from the age of Charlemagne.
At the beginning comes the invention of writing, possibly the only invention
of comparable importance to the invention of agriculture before the age of
steam. Most of it was done on clay for nearly half the time mankind has
possessed the skill. Writing had in fact been preceded by the invention of
cylinder seals, on which little pictures were incised to be rolled on to clay;
pottery may have degenerated, but these seals were one of the great
Mesopotamian artistic achievements. The earliest writings followed in the
form of pictograms or simplified pictures (a step towards non-representative
communication), on clay tablets usually baked after they had been inscribed
with a reed stalk. The earliest are in Sumerian and it can be seen that they

are memoranda, lists of goods, receipts; their emphasis is economic and they
cannot be read as continuous prose. The writing on these early notebooks
and ledgers evolved slowly towards cuneiform, a way of arranging
impressions stamped on clay by the wedge-like section of a chopped-off
reed. With this the break with the pictogram form is complete. Signs and
groups of signs come at this stage to stand for phonetic and possibly syllabic
elements and are all made up of combinations of the same basic wedge
shape. It was more flexible as a form of communication by signs than
anything used hitherto and Sumer reached it soon after 3000 BC.
A fair amount is therefore known about the Sumerian language. A few of
its words have survived to this day; one of them is the original form of the
word ‘alcohol’ (and the first recipe for beer), which is suggestive. But the
language’s greatest interest is its appearance in written forms at all. Literacy
must have been both unsettling and stabilizing. On the one hand it offered
huge new possibilities of communicating; on the other it stabilized practice
because the consultation of a record as well as oral tradition became
possible. It made much easier the complex operations of irrigating lands,
harvesting and storing crops, which were fundamental to a growing society.
Writing made for more efficient exploitation of resources. It also immensely
strengthened government and emphasized its links with the priestly castes
who at first monopolized literacy. Interestingly, one of the earliest uses of
seals appears to be connected with this, since they were used somehow to
certify the size of crops at their receipt in the temple. Perhaps they record at
first the operations of an economy of centralized redistribution, where men
brought their due produce to the temple and received there the food or
materials they themselves needed.
Besides such records, the invention of writing opens more of the past to
the historian in another way. He can at last begin to deal in hard currency
when talking about mentality. This is because writing preserves literature.
The oldest story in the world is the Epic of Gilgamesh. Its most complete
version, it is true, goes back only to the seventh century BC, but the tale itself
appears in Sumerian times and is known to have been written down soon
after 2000 BC. Gilgamesh was a real person, ruling at Uruk. He became also
the first individual and hero in world literature, appearing in other poems,
too. His is the first name which must appear in this book. To a modern reader
the most striking part of the Epic may be the coming of a great flood which
obliterates mankind except for a favoured family who survive by building an

ark; from them springs a new race to people the world after the flood has
subsided. This was not part of the Epic’s oldest versions, but came from a
separate poem telling a story which turns up in many Near-Eastern forms,
though its incorporation is easily understandable. Lower Mesopotamia must
always have had much trouble with flooding, which would undoubtedly put
a heavy strain on the fragile system of irrigation on which its prosperity
depended. Floods were the type, perhaps, of general disaster, and must have
helped to foster the pessimistic fatalism which some scholars have seen as
the key to Sumerian religion.
This sombre mood dominates the Epic. Gilgamesh does great things in his
restless search to assert himself against the iron laws of the gods which
ensure human failure, but they triumph in the end. Gilgamesh, too, must die.
The heroes, the wise men, like the new moon have their waxing and waning.
Men will say, ‘Who has ever ruled with might and with power like him?’ As
in the dark month, the month of shadows, so without him there is no light. O
Gilgamesh, this was the meaning of your dream. You were given the
kingship, such was your destiny; everlasting life was not your destiny.
Apart from this mood and its revelation of the religious temperament of a
civilization, there is much information about the gods of ancient
Mesopotamia in the Epic. But it is hard to get at history through it, let alone
relate it to the historical Gilgamesh. In particular, attempts to identify a
single, cataclysmic flood by archaeological means have not been convincing,
though plentiful evidence of recurrent flooding is available. From the water
eventually emerges the land: perhaps, then, what we are being given is an
account of the creation of the world, of genesis. In the Hebrew Bible earth
emerges from the waters at God’s will and that account satisfied most
educated Europeans for a thousand years. It is fascinating to speculate that
we may owe so much of our own intellectual ancestry to a mythical
reconstruction by the Sumerians of their own prehistory when farming land
had been created out of the morass of the Mesopotamian delta. But it is only
speculation; caution suggests we remain satisfied merely to note the
undeniable close parallels between the Epic and one of the best of the Bible
stories, that of Noah’s Ark.
This story hints at the possible importance of the diffusion of Sumerian
ideas in the Near East long after the focus of its history had moved away to
upper Mesopotamia. Versions and parts of the Epic – to stick to that text
alone for a moment – have turned up in the archives and relics of many

peoples who dominated parts of this region in the second millennium BC.
Though later to be lost until rediscovery in modern times, Gilgamesh was for
two thousand years or so a name to which literature in many languages could
knowingly refer, somewhat in the way that European authors could until
recently take it for granted that an allusion to classical Greece would be
understood by their readers. The Sumerian language lived on for centuries in
temples and scribal schools, much as Latin lived on for the learned in the
muddle of vernacular cultures in Europe after the collapse of the Western
classical world of Rome. The comparison is suggestive, because literary and
linguistic tradition embodies ideas and images which impose, permit and
limit different ways of seeing the world; they have, that is to say, historic
weight.
Probably the most important ideas kept alive by the Sumerian language
were religious. Cities like Ur and Uruk were the seedbed of ideas which,
after transmutation into other religions in the Near East during the first and
second millennia BC, were four thousand years later to be influential
worldwide, albeit in almost unrecognizably different forms. There is, for
example, in the Gilgamesh Epic an ideal creature of nature, the man Enkidu;
his fall from his innocence is sexual, a seduction by a harlot, and thereafter,
though the outcome for him is civilization, he loses his happy association
with the natural world. Literature makes it possible to observe such hints at
the mythologies of other and later societies. In literature, men begin to make
explicit the meanings earlier hidden in obscure relics of sacrificial offerings,
clay figures and the ground-plans of shrines and temples. In earliest Sumer
these already reveal an organization of human discourse with the
supernatural much more complex and elaborate than anything elsewhere at
so early a date. Temples had been the focus of the early cities and they grew
bigger and more splendid (in part, because of a tradition of building new
ones on mounds enclosing their predecessors). Sacrifices were offered in
them to ensure good crops. Later their cults elaborated, temples of still
greater magnificence were built as far north as Assur, 300 miles away up the
Tigris, and we hear of one built with cedars brought from the Lebanon and
copper from Anatolia.
No other ancient society at that time gave religion quite so prominent a
place or diverted so much of its collective resources to its support. It has
been suggested that this was because no other ancient society left men
feeling so utterly dependent on the will of the gods. Lower Mesopotamia in

ancient times was a flat, monotonous landscape of mud-flats, marsh and
water. There were no mountains for the gods to dwell in like men, only the
empty heavens above, the remorseless summer sun, the overturning winds
against which there was no protection, the irresistible power of flood-water,
the blighting attacks of drought. The gods dwelt in these elemental forces, or
in the ‘high places’ which alone dominated the plains, the brick-built towers
and ziggurats remembered in the biblical Tower of Babel. The Sumerians,
not surprisingly, saw themselves as a people created to labour for the gods.
By about 2250 BC a pantheon of gods more or less personifying the
elements and natural forces had emerged in Sumer. It was to provide the
backbone of Mesopotamian religion and the beginning of theology.
Originally, each city had its particular god. Possibly helped by political
changes in the relations of the cities, they were in the end organized into a
kind of hierarchy which both reflected and affected men’s views of human
society. The gods of Mesopotamia in the developed scheme are depicted in
human form. To each of them was given a special activity or role; there was
a god of the air, another of the water, another of the plough. Ishtar (as she
was later known under her Semitic name) was the goddess of love and
procreation, but also of war. At the top of the hierarchy were three great male
gods, whose roles are not easy to disentangle, Anu, Enlil and Enki. Anu was
father of the gods. Enlil was at first the most prominent; he was ‘Lord Air’,
without whom nothing could be done. Enki, god of wisdom and of the sweet
waters that literally meant life to Sumer, was a teacher and life-giver, who
maintained the order Enlil had shaped.
These gods demanded propitiation and submission in elaborate ritual. In
return for this and for living a good life they would grant prosperity and
length of days, but not more. In the midst of the uncertainties of
Mesopotamian life, some feeling that a possible access to protection existed
was essential. Men depended on the gods for reassurance in a capricious
universe. The gods – though no Mesopotamian could have put it in these
terms – were conceptualizations of elementary attempts to control
environment, to resist the sudden disasters of flood and dust-storm, to assure
the continuation of the cycle of the seasons by the repetition of the great
spring festival when the gods were again married and the drama of creation
was re-enacted. After that, the world’s existence was assured for another
year.

One of the great demands which men later came to make of religion was
that it should help them to deal with the inevitable horror of death. The
Sumerians, and those who inherited their religious ideas, can hardly have
derived much comfort from their beliefs, in so far as we can apprehend
them; they seem to have seen the world of life after death as a gloomy, sad
place. It was ‘The house where they sit in darkness, where dust is their food
and clay their meat, they are clothed like birds with wings for garments, over
bolt and door lie dust and silence.’ In it lies the origin of the later notions of
Sheol, of Hell. Yet at least one ritual involved virtual suicide, for a Sumerian
king and queen of the middle of the third millennium were followed to their
tombs by their attendants who were then buried with them, perhaps after
taking some soporific drink. This could suggest that the dead were going
somewhere where a great retinue and gorgeous jewellery would be as
important as on earth.
There were important political aspects to Sumerian religion. All land
belonged ultimately to the gods; the king, probably a king-priest as much as
a warrior-leader in origin, was but their vicar. No human tribunal, of course,
existed to call him to account. The vicariate also meant the emergence of a
priestly class, specialists whose importance justified economic privilege
which could permit the cultivation of special skills and knowledge. In this
respect, too, Sumer was the origin of a tradition, that of the seers,
soothsayers, wise men of the East. They also had charge of the first
organized system of education, based on memorizing and copying in the
cuneiform script.
Among the by-products of Sumerian religion were the first true likenesses
of human beings in art. In particular at one religious centre, Mari, there
seems to have been something of a fondness for portraying human figures
engaged in ritual acts. Sometimes they are grouped in processions; thus is
established one of the great themes of pictorial art. Two others are also
prominent: war and the animal world. Some have detected in the early
portraiture of the Sumerians a deeper significance. They have seen in them
the psychological qualities which made the astonishing achievements of
their civilization possible, a drive for pre-eminence and success. This, again,
is speculative. What we can also see for the first time in Sumerian art is
much of a daily life in earlier times hidden from us. Given the widespread
contacts of Sumer and its basic similarity of structure to other, neighbouring

peoples, it is not too much to infer that we can begin to see something of life
much as it was lived over a large area of the ancient Near East.
Seals, statuary and painting reveal a people often clad in a kind of furry –
goatskin or sheepskin? – skirt, the women sometimes throwing a fold of it
over one shoulder. The men are often, but not always, clean-shaven. Soldiers
wear the same costume and are only distinguishable because they carry
weapons and sometimes wear a pointed leather cap. Luxury seems to have
consisted in leisure and possessions other than dress, except for jewellery, of
which quantities have survived. Its purpose often seems to be the indication
of status and it symptomizes a society of growing complexity. There
survives, too, a picture of a drinking-party; a group of men sit in armchairs
with cups in their hands while a musician entertains them. At such moments
Sumer seems less remote.
Sumerian marriage had much about it which would have been familiar to
later societies. The crux of the matter was the consent of the bride’s family.
Once arranged to their satisfaction, a new monogamous family unit was
established by the marriage which was recorded in a sealed contract. Its head
was the patriarchal husband, who presided over both his relatives and his
slaves. It is a pattern which was until very recently observable in most parts
of the world. Yet there are interesting nuances. Legal and literary evidence
suggest that even in early times Sumerian women were less downtrodden
than their sisters in many later Near-Eastern societies. Semitic and non-
Semitic traditions may diverge in this. Sumerian stories of their gods suggest
a society very conscious of the dangerous and even awe-inspiring power of
female sexuality; the Sumerians were the first people to write about passion.
It is not easy to relate such things to institutions, but Sumerian law did not
regard women as mere chattels, but gave them important rights; even the
slave mother of a free man’s children had a certain protection at law. Divorce
arrangements provided for women as well as men to seek separations and for
the equitable treatment of divorced wives. Though a wife’s adultery was
punishable by death, while a husband’s was not, this difference is to be
understood in the light of concern over inheritance and property. It was not
until long after Sumerian times that Mesopotamian law begins to emphasize
the importance of virginity and to impose the veil on respectable women.
Both were signs of a hardening and more cramping role for them.
The Sumerians also demonstrated great technical inventiveness. Other
peoples would be much in their debt. The influence of the Sumerians’ laws

can be traced well into post-Sumerian times. Sumerians, too, laid the
foundations of mathematics, establishing the technique of expressing
number by position as well as by sign (as we, for example, can reckon the
figure 1 as one, one-tenth, ten or several other values, according to its
relation to the decimal point), and they arrived at a method of dividing the
circle into six equal segments. They knew about the decimal system, too,
though they did not exploit it, and we first encounter the seven-day week in
the Gilgamesh epic.
By the end of their history as an independent civilization Sumerians had
learnt to live in big groups; one city alone is said to have had thirty-six
thousand males. This made big demands on building skill, and even more
were made by the large monumental structures. Lacking stone, southern
Mesopotamians had first built in reeds plastered with mud, then with bricks
made from the mud and dried in the sun. Their brick technology was
advanced enough by the end of the Sumerian period to make possible very
large buildings with columns and terraces; the greatest of its monuments, the
Ziggurat of Ur, had an upper stage over 100 feet high and a base 200 feet by
150. The earliest surviving potter’s wheel was found at Ur; this was the first
way in which man made use of rotary motion. On it rested the large-scale
production of pottery which made it a man’s trade and not, like earlier
pottery, a woman’s. Soon, by 3000 BC, the wheel was being used for
transport. Another invention of the Sumerians was glass, and specialized
craftsmen were casting in bronze early in the third millennium BC.
This innovation raises further questions: where did the raw material come
from? There is no metal in southern Mesopotamia. Moreover, even in earlier
times, during the Neolithic, the region must have obtained from elsewhere
the flint and obsidian it needed for the first agricultural implements. Clearly
a widespread network of contacts abroad is in the background, above all
with the Levant and Syria, huge distances away, but also with Iran and
Bahrein, down the Persian Gulf. Before 2000 BC Mesopotamia was obtaining
goods – though possibly indirectly – from the Indus valley. Together with the
evidence of documentation (which reveals contacts with India before 2000
BC), it makes an impression of a dimly emerging international trading system
already creating important patterns of interdependence. When, in the middle
of the third millennium, supplies of tin from the Near East dried up,
Mesopotamian bronze weapons had to give way to unalloyed copper ones.

The whole of this was sustained on an agriculture which was from an
early date complicated and even rich. Barely, wheat, millet and sesame were
grains grown in quantity; the first may have been the main crop, and no
doubt explains the frequent evidence of the presence of alcohol in ancient
Mesopotamia. In the easy soil of the flood beds no very advanced tools were
needed to achieve intensive cultivation; the great contribution of technology
here was in the practice of irrigation and the growth of government. Such
skills accumulated slowly; the evidence of Sumerian civilization has been
left to us by 1500 years of history.
So far this huge stretch of time has been discussed almost as if nothing
happened during it, as if it were an unchanging whole. It was not. Whatever
reservations are made about the slowness of change in the ancient world, and
though it may now seem to us very static, these were fifteen centuries of
great change for the Mesopotamians – history, in the truest sense. Scholars
have recovered much of the story, but this is not the place to set it out in
detail, especially as much of it is still debated, much of it remains obscure
and even its dating is often only approximate. All that is needed here is to
relate the first age of Mesopotamian civilization to its successors and to what
was going on elsewhere at the same time.
Three broad phases can be marked out in the history of Sumer. The first,
lasting from about 3360 BC to 2400 BC, has been called its archaic period. Its
narrative content is a matter of wars between city-states, their waxings and
wanings. Fortified cities and the application of the wheel to military
technology in clumsy four-wheeled chariots are some of the evidence of this.
Towards the middle of this 900-year phase, local dynasties begin to establish
themselves with some success. Originally, Sumerian society seems to have
had some representative, even democratic basis, but a growth of scale led to
the emergence of kings distinct from the first priestly rulers; probably they
began as warlords appointed by cities to command their forces who did not
give up their power when the emergency which called them forth had
passed. From them stemmed dynasties which fought one another. The
sudden appearance of a great individual then opens a new phase.
He was Sargon I, a king of the Semitic city of Akkad, who conquered
Mesopotamia in 2334 BC and inaugurated an Akkadian supremacy. There
exists a sculpted head which is probably of him; if it is, it is one of the first
royal portraits. He was the first of a long line of empire-builders; he has been
thought to have sent his troops as far as Egypt and Ethiopia and he drew

Sumer into a wider world. Akkadian took cuneiform from Sumer and
Sargon’s rule was not based on the relative superiority of one city-state to
another. His regime achieved some degree of integration. His people were
among those which for thousands of years pressed in on the civilizations of
the river valleys from outside. They took over from its culture what they
wanted as they imposed themselves. This left behind a new style of
Sumerian art marked by the theme of royal victory.
Akkadian empire was not the end of Sumer, then, but its second main
phase. Though itself an interlude, it was important as an expression of a new
level of organization. By Sargon’s time a true state has appeared. The
division between secular and religious authority which had appeared in old
Sumer was fundamental. Though the supernatural still interpenetrated daily
life at every level, lay and priestly authority had diverged. The evidence is
physically apparent in the appearance of palaces beside the temples in the
Sumerian cities; the authority of the gods lay behind the occupant of the
palace, too.
Obscure though the turning of the notables of early cities into kings
remains, the evolution of professional soldiery probably played a part in it.
Disciplined infantry, moving in a phalanx with overlapping shields and
levelled spears, appear on monuments from Ur. In Akkad there is something
of a climax to early militarism. Sargon, it was boasted, had 5400 soldiers
eating before him in his palace. This, no doubt, was the end of a process
which built power on power; conquest provided the resources to maintain
such a force. But the beginnings may again have lain originally in the special
challenges and needs of Mesopotamia. As population rose, one chief duty of
the ruler must have been to mobilize labour for big works of irrigation and
flood control. The power to do this could also provide soldiers, and, as
weapons became more complex and expensive, professionalism would be
more likely. One source of Akkadian success was that they used a new
weapon, the composite bow made of strips of wood and horn.
The Akkadian hegemony was relatively short. After two hundred years,
under Sargon’s great-grandson, it was overthrown, apparently by mountain
peoples called Gutians, and the last phase of Sumer, called ‘neo-Sumerian’
by scholars, began. For another two hundred years or so, until 2000 BC,
hegemony again passed to the native Sumerians. This time its centre was Ur
and, though it is hard to see what it meant in practice, the first king of the
Third Dynasty of Ur who exercised this ascendancy called himself King of

Sumer and Akkad. Sumerian art in this phase showed a new tendency to
exalt the power of the prince; the tradition of popular portraiture of the
archaic period almost vanished. The temples were built again, bigger and
better, and the kings seem to have sought to embody their grandeur in the
ziggurats. Administrative documents show that the Akkadian legacy was
strong, too; neo-Sumerian culture shows many Semitic traits and perhaps the
aspiration to wider kingship reflects this inheritance. The provinces which
paid tribute to the last successful kings of Ur stretched from Susa, on the
frontiers of Elam on the lower Tigris, to Byblos on the coast of Lebanon.
This was the sunset of the first people to achieve civilization. Of course
they did not disappear, but their individuality was about to be merged in the
general history of Mesopotamia and the Near East. Their great creative era
was behind them and has focused our attention on a relatively small area; the
horizons of history are about to expand. Enemies abounded on the frontiers.
In about 2000 BC, the Elamites came and Ur fell to them. Why, we do not
know. There had been intermittent hostility between the peoples for a
thousand years and some have seen in this the outcome of a struggle to
control the routes of Iran which could guarantee access to the highlands
where lay minerals the Mesopotamians needed. At all events, it was the end
of Ur. With it disappeared the distinctive Sumerian tradition, now merged in
the swirling currents of a world of more than one civilization. It would now
be only occasionally visible in patterns made by others. For fifteen centuries
or so Sumer had built up the subsoil of civilization in Mesopotamia, just as
its precivilized forerunners had built up the physical subsoil on which it
itself rested. It left behind writing, monumental buildings, an idea of justice
and legalism and the beginning of mathematics and a great religious
tradition. It is a considerable record and the seed of much else. The
Mesopotamian tradition had a long life ahead of it and every side of it was
touched by the Sumerian legacy.
While the Sumerians had been building up their civilization, their
influence had contributed to changes elsewhere. All over the Fertile Crescent
new kingdoms and peoples had been appearing. They were stimulated or
taught by what they saw in the south and by the empire of Ur, as well as by
their own needs. The diffusion of civilized ways was already rapid. This
makes it very hard to delineate and categorize the main processes of these
centuries in a clear-cut way. Worse still, the Near East was for long periods a
great confusion of peoples, moving about for reasons we often do not

understand. The Akkadians themselves had been one of them, pushing up
originally from the great Semitic reservoir of Arabia to finish in
Mesopotamia. The Gutians, who took part in the Akkadians’ overthrow, were
Caucasians. The most successful of all of these peoples were the Amorites, a
Semitic stock which had spread far and wide and joined the Elamites to
overthrow the armies of Ur and destroy its supremacy. They had established
themselves in Assyria, or upper Mesopotamia, in Damascus, and in Babylon
in a series of kingdoms which stretched as far as the coast of Palestine.
Southern Mesopotamia, old Sumer, they continued to dispute with the
Elamites. In Anatolia their neighbours were the Hittites, an Indo-European
people which crossed from the Balkans in the third millennium. At the edges
of this huge confusion stood another old civilization, Egypt, and the
vigorous Indo-European peoples who had filled up Iran. The picture is a
chaos; the area is a maelstrom of races pushing into it from all sides. Patterns
grow hard to distinguish.
One convenient landmark is provided by the appearance of a new empire
in Mesopotamia, one which has left behind a famous name: Babylon.
Another famous name is inseparably linked to it, that of one of its kings,
Hammurabi. He would have a secure place in history if we knew nothing of
him except his reputation as a law-giver; his code is the oldest statement of
the legal principle of an eye for an eye. He was also the first ruler to unify
the whole of Mesopotamia, and though the empire was short-lived the city of
Babylon was to be from his time the symbolic centre of the Semitic peoples
of the south. It began with the triumph of one Amorite tribe over its rivals in
the confused period following the collapse of Ur. Hammurabi may have
become ruler in 1792 BC; his successors held things together until sometime
after 1600 BC, when the Hittites destroyed Babylon and Mesopotamia was
once more divided between rival peoples who flowed into it from all sides.
At its height the first Babylonian empire ran from Sumeria and the Persian
Gulf north to Assyria, the upper part of Mesopotamia. Hammurabi ruled the
cities of Nineveh and Nimrud on the Tigris, Mari high on the Euphrates, and
controlled that river up to the point at which it is nearest to Aleppo. Seven
hundred or so miles long and about a hundred miles wide, this was a great
state, the greatest, indeed, to appear in the region up to this time, for the
empire of Ur had been a looser, tributary affair. It had an elaborate
administrative structure, and Hammurabi’s code of laws is justly famous,
though it owes something of its pre-eminence to chance. As probably

happened to earlier collections of judgments and rules which have only
survived in fragments, Hammurabi’s was cut in stone and set up in the
courtyard of temples for the public to consult. But at greater length and in a
more ordered way than earlier collections it assembled some 282 articles,
dealing comprehensively with a wide range of questions: wages, divorce,
fees for medical attention and many other matters. This was not legislation,
but a declaration of existing law, and to speak of a ‘code’ may be misleading
unless this is remembered. Hammurabi assembled rules already current; he
did not create those laws de novo. This body of ‘common law’ long provided
one of the major continuities of Mesopotamian history.
The family, land and commerce seem to be the main concerns of this
compilation of rules. It gives a picture of a society already far beyond
regulation by the ties of kindred, local community and the government of
village headmen. By Hammurabi’s time the judicial process had emerged
from the temple and non-priestly courts were the rule. In them sat the local
town notables and from them appeals lay to Babylon and the king himself.
Hammurabi’s stele (the stone pillar on which his code was carved) clearly
stated that its aim was to assure justice by publishing the law:
Let the oppressed man who has a
cause
Come into the presence of my statue
And read carefully my inscribed
stele.
Sadly, perhaps, its penalties seem to have harshened by comparison with
older Sumerian practice, but in other respects, such as the laws affecting
women, Sumerian tradition survived in Babylon.
The code’s provisions in respect of property included laws about slaves.
Babylon, like every other ancient civilization and many of modern times,
rested on slavery. Very possibly the origin of slavery is conquest; certainly
slavery was the fate which probably awaited the loser of any of the wars of
early history and his women and children, too. But by the time of the first
Babylonian empire, regular slave-markets existed and there was a steadiness
of price which indicates a fairly regular trade. Slaves from certain districts
were especially prized for their reliable qualities. Though the master’s hold
on the slave was virtually absolute, some Babylonian slaves enjoyed

remarkable independence, engaging in business and even owning slaves on
their own account. They had legal rights, if narrow ones.
It is hard to assess what slavery meant in practice in a world lacking the
assumption which we take for granted that chattel slavery cannot be
justified. Generalities dissolve in the light of evidence about the diversity of
things slaves might do; if most lived hard lives, then so, probably, did most
men. Yet it is hard to feel anything but pity for the lives of captives being led
away to slavery before conquering kings on scores of memorials from the
‘golden standard’ of Ur in the middle of the third millennium to the stone
reliefs of Assyrian conquests 1500 years later. The ancient world rested
civilization on a great exploitation of man by man; if it was not felt to be
very cruel, this is only to say that no other possible way of running things
was conceivable.
Babylonian civilization in due time became a legend of magnificence. The
survival of one of the great images of city life – the worldly, wicked city of
pleasure and consumption – in the name ‘Babylon’ was a legacy which
speaks of the scale and richness of its civilization, though it owes most to a
later period. Yet enough remains, too, to see the reality behind this myth,
even for the first Babylonian empire. The great palace of Mari is an
outstanding example; walls in places forty feet thick surrounded courtyards,
300 or so rooms forming a complex drained by bitumen-lined pipes running
thirty feet deep. It covered an area measuring 150 by over 200 yards and is
the finest evidence of the authority the monarch had come to enjoy. In this
palace, too, were found great quantities of clay tablets whose writing reveals
the business and detail which government embraces by this period.
Many more tablets survive from the first Babylonian empire than from its
predecessors or immediate successors. They provide the detail which enables
us to know this civilization better, it has been pointed out, than we know
some European countries of a thousand years ago. They contribute evidence
of the life of the mind in Babylon, too. It was then that the Epic of
Gilgamesh took the shape in which we know it. The Babylonians gave
cuneiform script a syllabic form, thus enormously increasing its flexibility
and usefulness. Their astrology pushed forward the observation of nature
and left another myth behind, that of the wisdom of the Chaldeans, a name
sometimes misleadingly given to the Babylonians. Hoping to understand
their destinies by scanning the stars, the Babylonians built up a science,
astronomy, and established an important series of observations which was

another major legacy of their culture. It took centuries to accumulate after its
remote beginnings in Ur but by 1000 BC the prediction of lunar eclipses was
possible and within another two or three centuries the path of the sun and
some of the planets had been plotted with remarkable accuracy against the
positions of the apparently fixed stars. This was a scientific tradition
reflected in Babylonian mathematics, which has passed on to us the
sexagesimal system of Sumer in our circle of 360 degrees and the hour of
sixty minutes. The Babylonians also worked out mathematical tables and an
algebraic geometry of great practical utility and it seems likely they invented
the sundial, the earliest known instrument for measuring the passage of time.
Astronomy began in the temple, in the contemplation of celestial
movements announcing the advent of festivals of fertility and sowing, and
Babylonian religion held close to the Sumerian tradition. Like the old cities,
Babylon had a civic god, Marduk; gradually he elbowed his way to the front
among his Mesopotamian rivals. This took a long time. Hammurabi said
(significantly) that Anu and Enlil, the Sumerian gods, had conferred the
headship of the Mesopotamian pantheon upon Marduk, much as they had
bidden him to rule over all men for their good. 