Kings and noblemen hunted with passion, and in their palaces were entertained by musicians and
dancers. Among sports, boxing seems to go back into Bronze Age Crete, an
island where a unique sport of bull-leaping was also practised.
In such matters it is more obvious than anywhere else that we need not
pay much heed to chronology, far less to particular dates, even when we can
be sure of them. The notion of an individual civilization is less and less
helpful over the area with which we have so far been concerned, too. There
is too much interplay for it to bear the weight it can do in Egypt and Sumer.
Somewhere between about 1500 and 800 BC big changes took place which
ought not to be allowed to slip through the mesh of a net woven to catch the
history of the first two great civilizations. In the confused, turbulent Near
East and eastern Mediterranean of the centuries around 1000 BC a new world
different from that of Sumer and the Old Kingdom was in the making.
EARLY CIVILIZED LIFE IN THE AEGEAN
A new interplay of cultures brought many changes to peoples on the fringe
of the Near East but civilization in the Aegean islands was rooted in the
Neolithic as it was elsewhere. The first metal object found in Greece – a
copper bead – has been dated to about 4700 BC, and European as well as
Asian stimuli may have been at work. Crete is the largest of the Greek
islands. Several centuries before 2000 BC, towns with a regular layout were
being built there by an advanced people who had been there through
Neolithic times. They may have had contacts with Anatolia which spurred
them to exceptional achievements, but the evidence is indecisive. They could
well have arrived at civilization for themselves. At any rate, for about a

thousand years they built the houses and tombs by which their culture is
distinguished and these did not change much in style. By about 2500 BC
there were important towns and villages on the coasts, built of stone and
brick; their inhabitants practised metal-working and made attractive seals
and jewels. At this stage, that is to say, the Cretans shared much of the
culture of mainland Greece and Asia Minor. They exchanged goods with
other Aegean communities. There then came a change. About 500 years later
they began to build the series of great palaces which are the monuments of
what we call ‘Minoan’ civilization; the greatest of them, Knossos, was first
built about 1900 BC. Nothing quite as impressive appears anywhere else
among the islands and it exercised a cultural hegemony over more or less the
whole of the Aegean.
Minoan is a curious name; it is taken from the name of a King Minos who,
although celebrated in legend, may never have existed. Much later, the
Greeks believed – or said – that he was a great king in Crete who lived at
Knossos, parleyed with the gods, and married Pasiphae, the daughter of the
sun. Her monstrous offspring, the Minotaur, devoured sacrificial youths and
maids sent as tribute from Greece at the heart of a labyrinth eventually
penetrated successfully by the hero Theseus, who slew him. This is a rich
and suggestive theme and has excited scholars, who believe it can throw
light on Cretan civilization, but there is no proof that King Minos ever
existed. It may be that, as legend suggests, there was more than one of that
name, or that his name was a titular identification of several Cretan rulers.
He is one of those fascinating figures who, like King Arthur, remain just
beyond the borders of history but inside those of mythology.
Minoan, then, simply means the civilization of people who lived in
Bronze Age Crete; it has no other connotation. This civilization lasted some
600 years, but only the outlines of a history can be put together. They reveal
a people living in towns linked in some dependence on a monarchy at
Knossos. For three or four centuries they prosper, exchanging goods with
Egypt, Asia Minor and the Greek mainland, and subsisting on a native
agriculture. It may have been this which explains Minoan civilization’s leap
forward. Crete seems then, as today, to have been better for the production of
olives and vines, two of the great staples of later Mediterranean agriculture,
than either the other islands or mainland Greece. It seems likely, too, that she
raised large numbers of sheep and exported wool. Whatever its precise
forms, Crete experienced an important agricultural advance in late Neolithic

times, which led not only to better cereal-growing but, above all, to the
cultivation of the olive and vine. They could be grown where grains could
not and their discovery changed the possibilities of Mediterranean life.
Immediately they permitted a larger population. On this much else could
then be built because new human resources were available, but it also made
new demands, for organization and government, for the regulation of a more
complex agriculture and the handling of its produce.
Whether or not this explains the appearance of Minoan civilization, its
peak came about 1600 BC. A century or so later, the Minoan palaces were
destroyed. The mystery of this end is tantalizing. At about the same time the
major towns of the Aegean islands were destroyed by fire, too. There had
been earthquakes in the past; perhaps this was another of them. Recent
scholarship identifies a great eruption in the island of Thera at a suitable
time; it could have been accompanied by tidal waves and earthquakes in
Crete, seventy miles away, and followed by the descent of clouds of ash
which blighted Cretan fields. Some people have preferred to think of a rising
against the rulers who lived in the palaces. Some have discerned signs of a
new invasion, or postulated some great raid from the sea which carried off
booty and prisoners, destroying a political power for ever by the damage it
inflicted, and leaving no new settlers behind. None of these can be
conclusively established. It is only possible to guess about what happened
and the view which does least violence to the lack of evidence is that there
was a natural cataclysm originating in Thera which broke the back of
Minoan civilization.
Whatever the cause, this was not the end of early civilization in Crete, for
Knossos was occupied for another century or so by people from the
mainland. Nevertheless, though there were still some fairly prosperous times
to come, the ascendancy of the indigenous civilization of Crete was, in
effect, over. For a time, it seems, Knossos still prospered. Then, early in the
fourteenth century BC it, too, was destroyed by fire. This had happened
before, but this time it was not rebuilt. So ends the story of early Cretan
civilization.
Fortunately, its salient characteristics are easier to understand than the
detail of its history. The most obvious is its close relationship with the sea.
More than a thousand years later, Greek tradition said that Minoan Crete was
a great naval power exercising political hegemony in the Aegean through her
fleet. This idea has been much blown upon by modern scholars anxious to

reduce what they believe to be an anachronistic conception to more plausible
proportions and it certainly seems misleading to see behind this tradition the
sort of political power later exercised through their navies by such states as
fifth-century Athens or nineteenth-century Great Britain. The Minoans may
have had a lot of ships, but they were unlikely to be specialized at this early
date and there is no hope in the Bronze Age of drawing a line between trade,
piracy and counter-piracy in their employment. Probably there was no
Cretan ‘navy’ in an institutional sense at all. Nevertheless, the Minoans felt
sufficiently sure of the protection the sea gave them – and this must have
implied some confidence in their ability to dominate the approaches to the
natural harbours, most of which are on the north coast – to live in towns
without fortifications, built near to the shore on only slightly elevated
ground. We do not have to look for a Cretan Nelson among their defenders;
that would be silly. But we can envisage a Cretan Hawkins or Drake, trading,
freebooting and protecting the home base.
The Minoans thus exploited the sea as other peoples exploited their own
natural environments. The result was an interchange of products and ideas
which shows once more how civilization can accelerate where there is the
possibility of cross-fertilization. Minoans had close connections with Syria
before 1550 BC and traded as far west as Sicily, perhaps further. Someone
took their goods up the Adriatic coasts. Even more important was their
penetration of Greece. The Minoans may well have been the most important
single conduit through which the goods and ideas of the earliest civilizations
reached Bronze Age Europe. Certain Cretan products begin to turn up in
Egypt in the second millennium BC and this was a major outlet; the art of the
New Kingdom shows Cretan influence. There was even, some scholars
think, an Egyptian resident for some time at Knossos, presumably to watch
over well-established interests, and it has been argued that Minoans fought
with the Egyptians against the Hyksos. Cretan vases and metal goods have
been found at several places in Asia Minor: these are the things which
survive, but it has been asserted that a wide range of other products – timber,
grapes, oil, wood, metal vases and even opium – were supplied by the
Minoans to the mainland. In return, they took metal from Asia Minor,
alabaster from Egypt, ostrich eggs from Libya. It was already a complex
trading world.
Together with a prosperous agriculture it made possible a civilization of
considerable solidity, long able to recover from natural disaster, as the

repeated rebuilding of the palace at Knossos seems to show. The palaces are
the finest relics of Minoan civilization, but the towns were well built too,
and had elaborate piped drains and sewers. This was technical achievement
of a high order; early in the sequence of palaces at Knossos the bathing and
lavatory provision is on a scale unsurpassed before Roman times. Other
cultural achievement was less practical, though artistic rather than
intellectual; Minoans seem to have taken their mathematics from Egypt and
left it at that. Their religion went under with them, apparently leaving
nothing to the future, but the Minoans had an important contribution to make
to the style of another civilization on the Greek mainland. Art embodied
Minoan civilization at its highest and remains its most spectacular legacy. Its
genius was pictorial and reached a climax in palace frescoes of startling
liveliness and movement. Here is a really original style, influential across the
seas, in Egypt and in Greece. Through other palatial arts, too, notably the
working of gems and precious metals, it was to shape fashion elsewhere.
Representative art provides a little evidence about the Cretans’ style of
life. They seem to have dressed scantily, the women often being depicted
bare-breasted; the men are beardless. There is an abundance of flowers and
plants to suggest a people deeply and readily appreciative of nature’s gifts;
they do not give the impression that the Minoans found the world an
unfriendly place. Their relative wealth – given the standards of ancient times
– is attested by the rows of huge and beautiful oil-jars found in their palaces.
Their concern for comfort and what cannot but be termed elegance comes
clearly through the dolphins and lilies which decorate the former apartments
of a Minoan queen.
Archaeology has also provided evidence of the Minoan religious world,
though this does not, perhaps, take us very far since we have no texts. We
have representations of gods and goddesses, but it is not easy to be sure who
they are. Nor can we much penetrate their rituals, beyond registering the
frequency of sacrificial altars, sanctuaries in high places, double-headed
axes, and the apparent centring of Minoan cults in a female figure (though
her relationship to other deities remains a mystery). She is perhaps a
Neolithic fertility figure such as was to appear again and again as the
embodiment of female sexuality: the later Astarte and Aphrodite. In Crete
she appears elegantly skirted, bare-breasted, standing between lions and
holding snakes. Whether there was a male god, too, is less clear. But the
appearance of bulls’ horns in many places and of frescoes of these noble

beasts is suggestive if it is linked to later Greek legend (Minos’s mother,
Europa, had been seduced by Zeus in the shape of a bull; his wife Pasiphae
enjoyed a monstrous coition with a bull from which was born the half-bull,
half-man Minotaur), and to the obscure but obviously important rites of bull-
leaping. Sacrifice, it is clear, was important in the Minoans’ ritual attempts to
achieve communion with their deity or deities, and there is evidence which,
it has been argued, points to its inclusion of human victims, even of children,
and perhaps of ritual consumption of their flesh. Yet it is striking that
whatever it was, Cretan religion does not seem to have made Minoans
gloomy; pictures of sports and dancing or delicate frescoes and pottery do
not suggest an unhappy people.
The political arrangements of this society are obscure. The palace was not
only a royal residence, but in some sense an economic centre – a great store
– which may perhaps best be understood as the apex of an advanced form of
exchange based on redistribution by the ruler. The palace was also a temple,
but not a fortress. In its maturity it was the centre of a highly organized
structure whose inspiration may have been Asian; knowledge of the literate
empires of Egypt and Mesopotamia was available to a trading people. One
source of our knowledge of what Minoan government was trying to do is a
huge collection of thousands of tablets which are its administrative records.
They indicate rigid hierarchy and systematized administration, but not how
this worked in practice. However effective government was, the only thing
the records certainly show is what it aspired to, a supervision far closer and
more elaborate than anything conceivable by the later Greek world. If there
are any analogies, they are again with the Asian empires and Egypt.
At present, the tablets tell us only of the last phase of Minoan civilization
because many of them cannot be read. The weight of scholarly opinion now
inclines to the view put forward a few years ago that the script of a great
mass of them found at Knossos is used to write Greek and that they date
from about 1450 to 1375 BC. The script in which they are written has been
termed ‘Linear B’. The earlier written records are found at first in
hieroglyph, with some symbols borrowed from Egypt, and then in another
script (not yet deciphered) termed ‘Linear A’ and used from perhaps as early
as 1700 BC. Almost certainly it was wholly non-Greek. Some have argued
that incoming Greeks took over pre-existing Minoan administrative practice
and put down records, such as were already kept, in their own tongue. The
earlier tablets probably contain information which is very like that in the

later, but, if so, it is about Crete before the coming of whoever presided over
the last phase and mysterious end of Minoan civilization.
Successful invasion from the European mainland would itself have been a
sign that the conditions which had made this civilization possible were
crumbling away in the troubled times of the closing Bronze Age. Crete for a
long time had no rival to threaten her coasts. Perhaps the Egyptians had been
too busy; in the north there had long been no possible threat. Gradually, the
second of these conditions had ceased to hold. Stirring on the mainland were
others of those ‘Indo-European’ peoples who have already cropped up in so
many places in this story. Some of them penetrated Crete again after the final
collapse of Knossos; they were apparently successful colonists who
exploited the lowlands and drove away the Minoans and their shattered
culture to lonely little towns of refuge where they disappear from the stage
of world history.
Ironically, only two or three centuries before this, Cretan culture had
exercised something like hegemony in Greece, and Crete was always to hang
about mysteriously at the back of the Greek mind, a lost and golden land. A
direct transfusion of Minoan culture to the mainland had taken place through
the first Achaean peoples (the name usually given to these early Greek-
speakers) who came down into Attica and the Peloponnese and established
towns and cities there in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries BC. They
entered a land long in contact with Asia, whose inhabitants had already
contributed to the future one enduring symbol of Greek life, the fortification
of the high place of the town, or acropolis. The new arrivals were culturally
hardly superior to those they conquered, though they brought with them the
horse and war-chariot. They were barbarians by comparison with the
Cretans, with no art of their own. More aware of the role of violence and war
in society than were the islanders (no doubt because they did not enjoy the
protection of the sea and had a sense of continuing pressure from the
homelands from which they had come), they fortified their cities heavily and
built castles. Their civilization had a military style. Sometimes they picked
sites which were to be the later centres of Greek city-states; Athens and
Pylos were among them. They were not very large, the biggest containing at
most not more than a few thousand people. One of the most important was at
Mycenae, which gave its name to the civilization that finally spread over
Bronze Age Greece in the middle of the second millennium.

It left some splendid relics, for it was very rich in gold; strongly
influenced by Minoan art, it was also a true synthesis of Greek and
indigenous cultures on the mainland. Its institutional basis seems to have
been rooted in patriarchal ideas but there is more to it than that. The
bureaucratic aspiration revealed by the Knossos tablets and by others from
Pylos in the western Peloponnese of about 1200 BC suggests currents of
change flowing back from Crete towards the mainland. Each considerable
city had a king. The King at Mycenae, presiding over a society of warrior
landowners whose tenants and slaves were the aboriginal peoples, may have
been at an early date the head of some sort of federation of kings. There are
Hittite diplomatic records which suggest some degree of political cohesion
in Mycenaean Greece. Below the kings, the Pylos tablets show a close
supervision and control of community life and also important distinctions
between officials and, more fundamentally, between slave and free. What
cannot be known is just what such differences meant in practice. Nor can we
see much of the economic life that lay at the root of Mycenaean culture,
beyond its centralization in the royal household, as in Crete.
Whatever its material basis, the culture represented most spectacularly at
Mycenae had by 1400 BC spread all over mainland Greece and to many of
the islands. It was a coherent whole, although well-established differences of
Greek dialect persisted and distinguished one people from another down to
classical times. Mycenae replaced the Cretan trading supremacy in the
Mediterranean with its own. It had trading posts in the Levant and was
treated as a power by Hittite kings. Sometimes Mycenaean pottery exports
replaced Minoan, and there are even examples of Minoan settlements being
followed by Mycenaean.
The Mycenaean empire, if the term is permissible, was at its height in the
fifteenth and fourteenth centuries BC. For a while, the weakness of Egypt and
the crumbling of the Hittite power favoured it; for a time a small people
enriched by trade had disproportionate importance while great powers
waned. Mycenaean colonies were established on the shores of Asia Minor;
trade with other Asian towns, notably Troy at the entrance to the Black Sea,
prospered. But there are some signs of flagging from about 1300 BC. War
seems to have been one answer; Achaeans took important parts in attacks on
Egypt at the end of the century and it now seems that a great raid by them
which was immortalized as the Siege of Troy took place about 1200 BC. The

troubled background to these events was a series of dynastic upheavals in the
Mycenaean cities themselves.
What can be called the Dark Ages of the Aegean were about to close in
and they are as obscure as what was happening in the Near East at about the
same time. When Troy fell, new barbarian invasions of mainland Greece had
already begun. At the very end of the thirteenth century the great Mycenaean
centres were destroyed, perhaps by earthquakes, and the first Greece broke
up into disconnected settlements. As an entity Mycenaean civilization
collapsed, but not all the Mycenaean sites were abandoned, though their life
continued at a lower level of achievement. The kingly treasures disappeared,
the palaces were not rebuilt. In some places the established resident peoples
hung on successfully for centuries; elsewhere they were ruled as serfs or
driven out by new conquerors from the north, who had been on the move
from about a century before the fall of Troy. It does not seem likely that
these new peoples always settled the lands they ravaged, but they swept
away the existing political structures and the future would be built on their
kinships, not on the Mycenaean institutions. There is a picture of confusion
as the Aegean Dark Age deepens; only just before 1000 BC are there a few
signs that a new pattern – the ground-plan of classical Greece – was
emerging.
Legendary accounts of this attribute much to one particular group among
the newcomers, the Dorians. Vigorous and bold, they were to be
remembered as the descendants of Heracles. Though it is very dangerous to
argue back from the presence of later Greek dialects to identifiable and
compact groups of early invaders, tradition makes them the speakers of a
tongue, Doric, which lived on into the classical age as a dialect setting them
apart. In this case, tradition has been thought by scholars to be justified. In
Sparta and Argos, Dorian communities, which would be future city-states,
established themselves. But other peoples also helped to crystallize a new
civilization in this obscure period. The most successful were those later
identified as speakers of ‘Ionic’ Greek, the Ionians of the Dark Age. Setting
out from Attica (where Athens had either survived or assimilated the
invaders who followed Mycenae), they took root in the Cyclades and Ionia,
the present Turkish coast of the Aegean. Here, as migrants and pirates, they
seized or founded towns, if not on islands, almost always on or near the
coast, which were the future city-states of a seafaring race. Often the sites

they chose had already been occupied by the Mycenaeans. Sometimes – at
Smyrna, for example – they displaced earlier Greek settlers.
This is a confusing picture at best and for much of it there is only
fragmentary evidence. Yet from this turmoil there would slowly re-emerge
the unity of civilization enjoyed by the Bronze Age Aegean. At first, though,
there were centuries of disruption and particularism, a new period of
provincialism in a once cosmopolitan world. Trade flagged and ties with
Asia languished. What replaced them was the physical transference of
people, sometimes taking centuries to establish new settled patterns, but in
the end setting out the ground-plan of a future Greek world.
Immediately, there was a colossal setback in civilized life which should
remind us how fragile it could be in ancient times. Its most obvious sign was
a depopulation between 1100 and 1000 BC so widespread and violent that
some scholars have sought explanations in a sudden cataclysm – plague,
perhaps, or a climatic change such as might have suddenly and terribly
reduced the small cultivable area of the Balkan and Aegean hillsides.
Whatever the cause, the effects are to be seen also in a waning of elegance
and skill; the carving of hard gems, the painting of frescoes and the making
of the fine pottery all come to a stop. Such cultural continuity as the age
permitted must have been largely mental, a matter of songs, myths and
religious ideas.
Of this troubled time a very little is dimly and remotely reflected in the
bardic epics later set down in writing in the Iliad and the Odyssey. They
include material transmitted for generations by recitation, whose origins lie
in tradition near-contemporary with the events they purport to describe,
though later attributed to one poet, Homer. Exactly what is reflected is much
harder to agree about; the consensus has recently been that it is hardly
anything for Mycenaean times, and little more for what immediately
followed them. The central episode of the Iliad, the attack on Troy, is not
what matters here, though the account probably reflects a real preponderance
of Achaean initiative in the settlement of Asia Minor. What survives is a
little social and conceptual information carried incidentally by the poems.
Though Homer gives an impression of some special pre-eminence enjoyed
by the Mycenaean king, this is information about the post-Mycenaean
Aegean of the eighth century, when recovery from the Dark Ages begins. It
reveals a society whose assumptions are those of barbarian warlords rather
than those of rulers commanding regular armies or supervising bureaucracies

like those of Asia. Homer’s kings are the greatest of great nobles, the heads
of large households, their acknowledged authority tempered by the real
power of truculent near-equals and measured by their ability to impose
themselves; their lives are troubled and exacting. The atmosphere is
individualistic and anarchic: they are more like a band of Viking leaders than
the rulers who ran their affairs with instruments like the Mycenaean tablets.
Whatever reminiscences of detail may survive from earlier times (and these
have sometimes been confirmed in their accuracy by excavation) and
however many reflections of later society they eventually contained, the
poems only fitfully illuminate a primitive society, still in confusion, settling
down perhaps, but neither so advanced as Mycenae had been, nor even
dimly foreshadowing what Greece was to become.
The new civilization which was at last to emerge from the centuries of
confusion owed much to the resumption of intercourse with the East. It was
very important that the Hellenes (the name by which the invaders of Greece
came to be distinguished from their predecessors) had spread out into the
islands and on to the Asian mainland; they provided many points of contact
between two cultural worlds. But they were not the only links between Asia
and Europe. Seeds of civilization were always carried about by the go-
betweens of world history, the great trading peoples.
One of them, another seafaring race, had a long and troubled history,
though not so long as its legends said; the Phoenicians claimed that they had
arrived in Tyre in about 2700 BC. This may be treated like stories about the
descent of the Dorian kings from Heracles. None the less, they were already
settled on the coast of the modern Lebanon in the second millennium BC,
when the Egyptians were getting supplies of cedarwood from them. The
Phoenicians were a Semitic people. Like the Arabs of the Red Sea, they
became seafarers because geography urged them to look outwards rather
than inland. They lived in the narrow coastal strip which was the historic
channel of communication between Africa and Asia. Behind them was a
shallow hinterland, poor in agricultural resources, cut up by hills running
down from the mountains to the sea so that the coastal settlements found it
difficult to unite. There were parallels with the experience of later Greek
states tempted to the sea in similar circumstances and in each case the result
was not only trade but colonization.
Weak at home – they came under the sway of Hebrew, Egyptian and
Hittite in turn – it cannot be entirely coincidental that the Phoenicians

emerge from the historical shadows only after the great days of Egypt,
Mycenae and the Hittite empire. They, too, prospered in others’ decline. It
was after 1000 BC, when the great era of Minoan trade was long past, that the
Phoenician cities of Byblos, Tyre and Sidon had their brief golden age. Their
importance then is attested by the biblical account of their part in the
building of Solomon’s Temple; ‘thou knowest’, says Solomon, ‘that there is
not among us any that can skill to hew timber like unto the Sidonians’, and
he paid up appropriately (1 Kings 5: 6). This is perhaps evidence of a
uniquely large and spectacular public works contract in ancient times, but
there is copious evidence later of the continuing importance of Phoenician
enterprise. Ancient writers often stressed their reputation as traders and
colonizers. They may have traded with the savages of Atlantic Europe; they
were certainly skilled long-distance navigators. Their dyes were long famous
and much sought after even in classical times. No doubt commercial need
stimulated Phoenician inventiveness; it was at Byblos (from which the
Greeks were to take their name for a book) that the alphabet later adopted by
the Greeks was invented. This was a great step, making a more widespread
literacy possible. Yet no remarkable Phoenician literature survives, while
Phoenician art tends to reflect their role of the middleman, borrowing and
copying from Asian and Egyptian models, perhaps as the customer
demanded.
Trade was the Phoenicians’ preoccupation and did not at first require
settlement overseas. Yet they came to base themselves more and more on
colonies or trading stations, sometimes where Mycenaeans had traded before
them. The furthest lay just beyond the entrance to the Mediterranean, where
Gadir was founded on the site of modern Cadiz to link Mediterranean to
Atlantic trade, and assure supplies of silver and tin. There were in the end
some twenty-five such ports up and down the Mediterranean, the earliest set
up at Kition (the modern Larnaca) in Cyprus at the end of the ninth century
BC. Sometimes colonies followed earlier Phoenician commercial activity on
the spot. They might also reflect the time of troubles which overtook the
Phoenician cities after a brief phase of independence at the beginning of the
first millennium. In the seventh century Sidon was razed to the ground and
the daughters of the king of Tyre were carried off to the harem of the
Assyrian Ashurbanipal. Phoenicia was then reduced to its colonies elsewhere
in the Mediterranean and little else. Yet their establishment may also have
reflected anxiety at a wave of Greek colonization in the west which

threatened the supply of metal, especially of British tin and Spanish silver.
This could explain the Phoenician foundation of Carthage a century earlier;
it was to become the seat of a power more formidable by far than Tyre and
Sidon had ever been and went on to establish its own chain of colonies.
Further west, beyond the Straits of Gibraltar, Cadiz was already known to
Phoenicians who called there while looking for an Atlantic trade further
north.
The Phoenicians were among the most important traffickers in civilization
but so, willy-nilly, had been others – the Mycenaeans by their diffusion of a
culture and the Hellenes by their stirring up of the ethnic world of the
Aegean. The Cretans had been something more; true originators, they not
only took from the great established centres of culture, but remade what they
took before diffusing it again. These peoples help to shape a more rapidly
changing world. One important side-effect, of which little has yet been said,
was the stimulation of continental Europe. The search for minerals slowly
took explorers and prospectors further and further into that unknown.
Already in the second millennium there are the first signs of a complicated
future; beads found at Mycenae were manufactured in Britain from Baltic
amber. Trade was always slowly at work, eating away isolation, changing
peoples’ relations with one another, imposing new shapes on the world. But
it is hard to relate this story to the stirring of the ethnic pot in the Aegean, let
alone to the troubled history of the Asian mainland from the second
millennium BC.
THE NEAR EAST IN THE AGES OF CONFUSION
‘Confusion’ is a matter of perspective. For about 800 years from, say, the
end of Knossos, the history of the Near East is indeed very confused if our
standpoint is that of world history. What was essentially going on were
disputes about control of the slowly growing wealth of the best-defined
agricultural region of the ancient world (the empires which came and went
could not find resources in the desert and steppe area on the borders of the
Near East which could justify their conquest) and in that story it is hard to
find any continuing thread. Invaders came and went rapidly, some of them
leaving new communities behind them, some setting up new institutions to
replace those they overthrew. This could hardly have been grasped by those
to whom these events would only have come home occasionally, and

suddenly, when (for instance) their homes were burned, their wives and
daughters raped, their sons carried off to slavery – or, less dramatically,
when they discovered that a new governor was going to levy higher taxes.
Such events would be upsetting enough – if a stronger word is not required.
On the other hand, millions of people must also have lived out their lives
unaware of any change more dramatic than the arrival in their village one
day of the first iron sword or sickle; hundreds of communities lived within a
pattern of ideas and institutions unchanged for many generations. This is an
important reservation. It must not be forgotten when we stress the dynamism
and violence of the Near East’s history during the transition from the Bronze
to Iron Ages, an era already considered from the standpoint of the peoples of
the Aegean.
On the mainland, wandering peoples moved about in a zone where there
were long-established centres of government and population, powerful and
long-lasting political structures, and numerous hierarchies of specialists in
administration, religion and learning. These partly explain why the coming
of new peoples obliterates less of what had already been achieved than in the
Aegean. Another conservative force was the contact many of the barbarians
had already had with civilization in this region. It left them wanting not to
destroy it but to enjoy its fruits themselves. These two forces helped in the
long run to diffuse civilization further and to produce the increasing
cosmopolitanism of a large and confused, but civilized and interconnected,
Near East.
The story begins very early, somewhere back towards the beginning of the
second millennium BC, with the arrival in Asia Minor of the Hittites. Perhaps
they belonged to the same group of peoples as those of Minoan Crete; at any
rate they were established in Anatolia at about the same time that Minoan
civilization was rising to its greatest triumphs. They were far from being
primitive barbarians. They had a legal system of their own and absorbed
much of what Babylon could teach. They had enjoyed a virtual monopoly of
iron in Asia; this not only had great agricultural importance but, together
with their mastery of fortification and the chariot, gave the Hittites a military
superiority which was the scourge of Egypt and Mesopotamia. The raid
which cut down Babylon in about 1590 BC was something like the high-
water mark of the first Hittite ‘empire’. A period of eclipse and obscurity
followed. Then, in the first half of the fourteenth century, came a renaissance
of power. This second and even more splendid era saw a Hittite hegemony

which stretched at one brief moment from the shores of the Mediterranean to
the Persian Gulf. It dominated all of the Fertile Crescent except Egypt and
successfully challenged even that great military power while being almost
ceaselessly at war with the Mycenaeans. But, like other empires, it crumbled
after a century or so, the end coming in about 1200 BC.
The culmination and collapse of this great organizing effort at the
beginning of ‘dark ages’ for Greece and the Aegean has two interesting
features. The first is that the Hittites by this time no longer enjoyed a
monopoly of iron; by about 1000 BC it is to be found in use all over the Near
East and its diffusion must surely be part of the story of the swing of power
against the Hittites. The other interesting feature is a coincidence with the
rhythm of migrations, for it seems that the great diffusers of iron technology
were the Indo-European peoples who from about 1200 BC were throwing so
much into turmoil. The disappearance of Troy, which never recovered from
the Achaean destruction, has been thought of great strategic importance in
this respect; the city seems to have played until this time a leading role in an
alliance of powers of Asia Minor, who had held the line against the
barbarians from the north. After its overthrow, no other focus for resistance
appeared. There is a closeness of timing which some have thought too
pronounced to be merely coincidental between the collapse of the last Hittite
power and the attacks of ‘sea peoples’ recorded in the Egyptian records. The
particular conquerors of the Hittites were a people from Thrace called the
Phrygians.
The ‘sea peoples’ were yet another indicator of the great folk movements
of the era. Armed with iron, from the beginning of the twelfth century BC
they were raiding the mainland of the East Mediterranean basin, ravaging
Syrian and Levantine cities. Some of them may have been ‘refugees’ from
the Mycenaean cities who moved first to the Dodecanese and then to
Cyprus. One group among them, the Philistines, settled in Canaan in about
1175 BC and are commemorated still by a modern name derived from their
own: Palestine. But Egyptians were the major victims of the sea peoples.
Like the Vikings of the northern seas 2000 years later, sea-borne invaders
and raiders plunged down on the delta again and again, undeterred by
occasional defeat, at one time even wresting it from Pharaoh’s control. Egypt
was under great strain. In the early eleventh century, she broke apart and was
disputed between two kingdoms. Nor were the sea peoples Egypt’s only
enemies. At one point, a Libyan fleet appears to have raided the delta,

though it was driven off. In the south, the Nubian frontier did not yet present
a problem, but around 1000 BC an independent kingdom emerged in the
Sudan which would later be troublesome. The tidal surge of barbarian
peoples was wearing away the old structures of the Near East just as it had
worn away Mycenaean Greece.
This is far enough into the welter of events to make it clear that we have
entered an age both too complex and too obscure for straightforward
narration. Mercifully, there soon appear two threads through the turmoil.
One is an old theme renewed, that of the continuing Mesopotamian tradition
about to enter its last phase. The other is quite new. It begins with an event
we cannot date and know only through tradition recorded centuries later, but
which probably occurred during the testing time imposed on Egypt by the
sea peoples. Whenever and however it happened, a turning-point had been
reached in world history when there went out of Egypt people whom the
Egyptians called Hebrews and the world later called Jews.
For many people over many centuries, mankind’s history before the
coming of Christianity was the history of the Jews and what they recounted
of the history of others. Both were written down in the books called the Old
Testament, the sacred writings of the Jewish people, subsequently diffused
worldwide in many languages by the Christian missionary impulse and the
invention of printing. They were to be the first people to arrive at an abstract
notion of God and to forbid his representation by images. No people has
produced a greater historical impact from such comparatively insignificant
origins and resources, origins so insignificant indeed that it is still difficult to
be sure of very much about them.
The origins lie among the Semitic, nomadic peoples of Arabia, whose
prehistoric and historic tendency was to press into the richer lands of the
Fertile Crescent nearest to their original homes. The first stage of their story
of which history must take notice is the age of the patriarchs, whose
traditions are embodied in the biblical accounts of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob. There do not seem to be good grounds for denying that men who
were the origins of these gigantic and legendary figures actually existed. If
they did, it was in about 1800 BC and their story is a part of the confusion
following the end of Ur. The Bible states that Abraham came from Ur to
Canaan; this is quite plausible and would not conflict with what we know of
the dispersal of Amorite and other tribes in the next 400 years. Those among
them who were to be remembered as the descendants of Abraham became

known in the end as ‘Hebrews’, a word meaning ‘wanderer’, which does not
appear before Egyptian writings and inscriptions of the fourteenth or
thirteenth century BC, long after their first settlement in Canaan. Although
this word is not wholly satisfactory, it is probably the best name to give the
tribes with which we are concerned at this time. It is a better term to identify
this group than ‘Jews’, and for all the traditional associations gathered
around that word by centuries of popular usage it is best to reserve it (as
scholars usually do) for a much later era than that of the patriarchs.
It is in Canaan that Abraham’s people are first distinguishable in the Bible.
They are depicted as pastoralists, organized tribally, quarrelling with
neighbours and kinsmen over wells and grazing, still liable to be pushed
about the Near East by the pressures of drought and hunger. One group
among them went down into Egypt, we are told, perhaps in the early
seventeenth century BC; it was to appear in the Bible as the family of Jacob.
As the story unfolds in the Old Testament, we learn of Joseph, the great son
of Jacob, rising high in Pharaoh’s service. At this point we might hope for
help from Egyptian records. It has been suggested that this happened during
the Hyksos ascendancy, since only a period of large-scale disturbance could
explain the improbable pre-eminence of a foreigner in the Egyptian
bureaucracy. It may be so, but there is no evidence to confirm or disprove it.
There is only tradition, as there is only tradition for all Hebrew history until
about 1200 BC. This tradition is embodied in the Old Testament; its texts
only took their present form in the seventh century BC, perhaps 800 years
after the story of Joseph, though older elements can be and have been
distinguished in them. As evidence, it stands in something like the relation to
Jewish origins in which Homer stands to those of Greece.
None of this would matter very much, and certainly would not interest
anyone except professional scholars, were it not for events which occurred
from one to three thousand years later. Then, the destinies of the whole
world were swayed by the Christian and Islamic civilizations whose roots
lay in the religious tradition of a tiny, not very easily identifiable Semitic
people, for centuries hardly distinguishable from many similar wanderers by
the rulers of the great empires of Mesopotamia and Egypt. This was because
the Hebrews somehow arrived at a unique religious vision.
Throughout the world of the ancient Near East it is possible to see at work
forces which were likely to make monotheistic religious views more
appealing. The power of local deities was likely to be questioned after

contemplation of the great upheavals and disasters which time and time
again swept across the region after the first Babylonian empire. The religious
innovations of Akhnaton and the growing assertiveness of the cult of
Marduk have both been seen as responses to such a challenge. Yet only the
Hebrews and those who came to share their beliefs were able to push the
process home, transcending polytheism and localism to arrive at a coherent
and uncompromising monotheism.
The timing of this process is very difficult to establish but its essential
steps were not complete before the eighth century BC. In the earliest times at
which Hebrew religion could be distinguished it was probably polytheistic,
but also monolatrous – that is to say, that like other Semitic peoples the
tribes who were the forerunners of the Jews believed that there were many
gods, but worshipped only one, their own. The first stage of refinement was
the idea that the people of Israel (as the descendants of Jacob came to be
called) owed exclusive allegiance to Yahweh, the tribal deity, a jealous God,
who had made a covenant with his people to bring them again to the
promised land, the Canaan to which Yahweh had already brought Abraham
out of Ur, and which remains a focus of racial passion right down to the
present day. The covenant was a master idea. Israel was assured that if it did
something, then something desirable would follow. This was very unlike the
religious atmosphere of Mesopotamia or Egypt. The exclusive demands of
Yahweh opened the way to monotheism, for when the time came for this the
Israelites felt no respect for other gods which might be an obstacle for such
evolution. Nor was this all. At an early date Yahweh’s nature was already
different from that of other tribal gods. That no graven image was to be
made of him was the most distinctive feature of his cult. At times, he appears
as other gods, in an immanent dwelling place, such as a temple made with
hands, or even in manifestations of nature, but, as the Israelite religion
developed, he could be seen as transcendent deity:
‘the LORD is in his holy temple, the LORD’s throne is in heaven’ Psalm xi: 4
says a psalm. He had created everything, but existed independently of his
creation, a universal being.
‘Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy
presence?’ asked the Psalmist. Psalm cxxxix: 7

The creative power of Yahweh was something else differentiating the Jewish
from the Mesopotamian tradition. Both saw Man’s origins in a watery chaos;
‘the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the
deep’, says the book of Genesis. For the Mesopotamian, no pure creation
was involved; somehow, matter of some sort had always been there and the
gods only arranged it. It was different for the Hebrew; Yahweh had already
created the chaos itself. He was for Israel what was later described in the
Christian creed, ‘maker of all things, by whom all things are made’.
Moreover, he made Man in his own image, as a companion, not as a slave;
Man was the culmination and supreme revelation of His creative power, a
creature able to know good from evil, as did Yahweh Himself. Finally, Man
moved in a moral world set by Yahweh’s own nature. Only He was just;
man-made laws might or might not reflect His will, but He was the sole
author of right and justice.
The implications of such ideas were to take centuries to clarify and
millennia to demonstrate their full weight. At first, they were well wrapped
up in the assumptions of a tribal society looking for a god’s favour in war.
Much in them reflected the special experience of a desert-dwelling people.
Later Jewish tradition placed great emphasis on its origins in the exodus
from Egypt, a story dominated by the gigantic and mysterious figure of
Moses. Clearly, when the Hebrews came to Canaan, they were already
consciously a people, grouped around the cult of Yahweh. The biblical
account of the wanderings in Sinai probably reports the crucial time when
this national consciousness was forged. But the biblical tradition is again all
that there is to depend upon and it was only recorded much later. It is
certainly credible that the Hebrews should at last have fled from harsh
oppression in a foreign land – an oppression which could, for example,
reflect burdens imposed by the mobilizing of labour for huge building
operations. Moses is an Egyptian name and there may well have existed a
historical original of the great legendary leader who dominates the biblical
story by managing the exodus and holding the Hebrews together in the
wilderness. In the traditional account, he founded the Law by bringing down
the Ten Commandments from his encounter with Yahweh. This was the
occasion of the renewal of the covenant by Yahweh and his people at Mount
Sinai, and it may be seen as a formal return to its traditions by a nomadic
people whose cult had been eroded by long sojourn in the Nile delta.
Unfortunately, the exact role of the great religious reformer and national

leader remains impossible to define and the Commandments themselves
cannot be convincingly dated until much later than the time when he lived.
Yet though the biblical account cannot be accepted as it stands, it should
be treated with respect as our only evidence for much of Jewish history. It
contains much that can be related to what is known or inferred from other
sources. Archaeology comes to the historians’ help only with the arrival of
the Hebrews in Canaan. The story of conquest told in the book of Joshua fits
evidence of destruction in the Canaanite cities in the thirteenth century BC.
What we know of Canaanite culture and religion also fits the Bible’s account
of Hebrew struggles against local cult practice and a pervasive polytheism.
Palestine was disputed between two religious traditions and two peoples
throughout the twelfth century and this, of course, again illustrates the
collapse of Egyptian power, since this crucial area could not have been left
to be the prey of minor Semitic peoples had the monarchy’s power still been
effective. It now seems likely that the Hebrews attracted to their support
other nomadic tribes, the touchstone of alliance being adherence to Yahweh.
After settlement, although the tribes quarrelled with one another, they
continued to worship Yahweh and this was for some time the only uniting
force among them, for tribal divisions formed Israel’s only political
institution.
The Hebrews took as well as destroyed. They were clearly in many ways
less advanced culturally than the Canaanites and they took over their script.
They borrowed their building practice, too, though without always achieving
the same level of town life as their predecessors. Jerusalem was for a long
time a little place of filth and confusion, not within striking distance of the
level reached by the town life of the Minoans long before. Yet in Israel lay
the seeds of much of the future history of the human race.
Settlement in Palestine had been essentially a military operation and
military necessity provoked the next stage in the consolidation of a nation. It
seems to have been the challenge from the Philistines (who were obviously
more formidable opponents than the Canaanites) which stimulated the
emergence of the Hebrew kingship at some time about 1000 BC. With it
appears another institution, that of the special distinction of the prophets, for
it was the prophet Samuel who anointed (and thus, in effect, designated)
both Saul, the first king, and his successor, David. When Saul reigned, the
Bible tells us, Israel had no iron weapons, for the Philistines took care not to
endanger their supremacy by permitting them. None the less, the Jews learnt

the management of iron from their enemies; the Hebrew words for ‘knife’
and ‘helmet’ both have Philistine roots. Ploughshares did not exist, but if
they had they could have been beaten into swords.
Saul won victories, but died at last by his own hand and his work was
completed by David. Of all Old Testament individuals, David is
outstandingly credible both for his strengths and weaknesses. Although there
is no archaeological evidence that he existed, he lives still as one of the great
figures of world literature and was a model for kings for 2000 years. The
literary account, confused though it is, is irresistibly convincing. It tells of a
noble-hearted but flawed and all-too-human hero who ended the Philistine
peril and reunited the kingdom which had split at Saul’s death. Jerusalem
became Israel’s capital and David then imposed himself upon the
neighbouring peoples. Among them were the Phoenicians who had helped
him against the Philistines, and this was the end of Tyre as an important
independent state.
Yet it was David’s son and successor, Solomon, who was the first king of
Israel to achieve major international standing. He gave his army a chariot
arm, launched expeditions to the south against the Edomites, allied with
Phoenicia and built a navy. Conquest and prosperity followed.
‘And Solomon reigned over all kingdoms from the river [Euphrates] unto the
land of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt… and Judah and Israel
dwelt safely, every man under his vine and under his fig tree, from Dan even
to Beersheba, all the days of Solomon.’ I Kings 4: 21, 25
Again, this sounds like the exploitation of possibilities available to the weak
when the great are in decline; the success of Israel under Solomon is further
evidence of the eclipse of the older empires and it was matched by the
successes of other now-forgotten peoples of Syria and the Levant who
constituted the political world depicted in the obscure struggles recorded in
the Old Testament. Most of them were descendants of the old Amorite
expansion. Solomon was a king of great energy and drive and the economic
and technical advances of the period were also notable. He was an
entrepreneur ruler of the first rank. The legendary ‘King Solomon’s Mines’
have been said to reflect the activity of the first copper refinery of which
there is evidence in the Near East, but this is disputed. Certainly the building
of the Temple (after Phoenician models) was only one of many public works,
though perhaps the most important. David had given Israel a capital, thus

increasing the tendency to political centralization. He had planned a temple
and when Solomon built it the worship of Yahweh was given a more
splendid form than ever before and an enduring focus.
A tribal religion had successfully resisted the early dangers of
contamination by the fertility rites and polytheism of the agriculturists
among whom the Hebrews had settled in Canaan. But there was always a
threat of backsliding which would compromise the covenant. With success
came other dangers, too. A kingdom meant a court, foreign contacts and – in
Solomon’s day – foreign wives who cherished the cults of their own gods.
Denunciation of the evils of departing from the law by going a-whoring after
the fertility gods of the Philistines had been the first role of the prophets; a
new luxury gave them a social theme as well.
The prophets brought to its height the Israelite idea of God. They were not
soothsayers such as the Near East already knew (though this is probably the
tradition which formed the first two great prophets, Samuel and Elijah), but
preachers, poets, political and moral critics. Their status depended
essentially on the conviction they could generate in themselves and others,
that God spoke through them. Few preachers have had such success. In the
end Israel would be remembered not for the great deeds of her kings but for
the ethical standards announced by her prophets. They shaped the
connections of religion with morality which were to dominate not only
Judaism but Christianity and Islam.
The prophets evolved the cult of Yahweh into the worship of a universal
God, just and merciful, stern to punish sin but ready to welcome the sinner
who repented. This was the climax of religious culture in the Near East, a
point after which religion could be separated from locality and tribe. The
prophets also bitterly attacked social injustice. Amos, Isaiah and Jeremiah
went behind the privileged priestly caste to do so, denouncing religious
officialdom directly to the people. They announced that all men were equal
in the sight of God, that kings might not simply do what they would; they
proclaimed a moral code which was a given fact, independent of human
authority. Thus the preaching of adherence to a moral law which Israel
believed was god-given became also a basis for a criticism of existing
political power. Since the law was not made by man it did not ostensibly
emerge from that power; the prophets could always appeal to it as well as to
their divine inspiration against king or priest. It is not too much to say that, if
the heart of political liberalism is the belief that power must be used within a

moral framework independent of it, then its tap-root is the teaching of the
prophets.
Most of the prophets after Samuel spoke against a troubled background,
which they called in evidence as signs of backsliding and corruption. Israel
had prospered in the eclipse of paramount powers, when kingdoms came and
went with great rapidity. After Solomon’s death in 935 BC Hebrew history
had ups as well as downs, but broadly took a turn for the worse. There had
already been revolts; soon the kingdom split. Israel became a northern
kingdom, built on ten tribes gathered together around a capital at Samaria; in
the south the tribes of Benjamin and Judah still held Jerusalem, capital of the
kingdom of Judah. The Assyrians obliterated Israel in 722 BC and the ten
tribes disappeared from history in mass deportations. Judah lasted longer. It
was more compact and somewhat less in the path of great states; it survived
until 587 BC, when Jerusalem’s walls and Temple were razed by a
Babylonian army. The Judaeans, too, then suffered deportations, many of
them being carried away to Babylon, to the great experience of the Exile, a
period so important and formative that after it we may properly speak of ‘the
Jews’, the inheritors and transmitters of a tradition still alive and easily
traced. Once more great empires had established their grip in Mesopotamia
and gave its civilization its last flowering. The circumstances which had
favoured the appearance of a Jewish state had disappeared. Fortunately for
the Jews, the religion of Judah now ensured that this did not mean that their
national identity was doomed too.
Since the days of Hammurabi, the peoples of the Mesopotamian valley
had been squeezed in a vice of migratory peoples. For a long time its
opposing jaws had been the Hittites and the Mitanni, but from time to time
others had ruled in Assur and Babylon. When, in due course, the Hittites also
crumbled, ancient Mesopotamia was the seat of no great military power until
the ninth century BC, though such a sentence conceals much. One Assyrian
king briefly conquered Syria and Babylon early in the eleventh century; he
was soon swept away by a cluster of pushful Semitic tribes whom scholars
call Aramaeans, followers of the old tradition of expansion into the fertile
lands from the desert. Together with a new line of Kassite kings in Babylon
they were the awkward and touchy neighbours of the reduced kings of
Assyria for 200 years or so – for about as long as the United States has
existed. Though one of these Semitic peoples was called the Chaldees and
therefore subsequently gave its name somewhat misleadingly to Babylonia,

there is not much to be remarked in this story except further evidence of the
fragility of the political constructions of the ancient world.
Shape only begins to reappear in the turmoil of events in the ninth century
BC when Mesopotamia recovered. Then, the Old Testament tells us, Assyrian
armies were once more on the move against the Syrian and Jewish
kingdoms. After some successful resistance the Assyrians came back again
and again, and they conquered. This was the beginning of a new, important
and unpleasant phase of Near Eastern history. A new Assyrian empire was in
the making. In the eighth century it was moving to its apogee, and Nineveh,
the capital high up the Tigris, which had replaced the ancient centre of Assur,
became the focus of Mesopotamian history as Babylon had once been.
Assyrian empire was unified in a way that other great empires were not; it
did not rely on the vassalization of kings and the creation of tributaries.
Instead, it swept native rulers away and installed Assyrian governors. Often,
too, it swept away peoples. One of its characteristic techniques was mass
deportation; the Ten Tribes of Israel are the best-remembered victims.
Assyrian expansion was carried forward by repeated and crushing victory.
Its greatest successes followed 729 BC, when Babylon was seized. Soon
after, Assyrian armies destroyed Israel, Egypt was invaded, its kings were
confined to Upper Egypt and the delta was annexed. By then Cyprus had
submitted, Cilicia and Syria had been conquered. Finally, in 646 BC, Assyria
made its last important conquest, part of the land of Elam, whose kings
dragged the Assyrian conqueror’s chariot through the streets of Nineveh. The
consequences were of great importance for the whole Near East. A
standardized system of government and law spanned the whole area.
Conscript soldiers and deported populations were moved about within it,
sapping its provincialism. Aramaic spread widely as a common language. A
new cosmopolitanism was possible after the Assyrian age.
This great formative power is commemorated in monuments of
undeniable impressiveness. Sargon II (721–705 BC) built a great palace at
Khorsabad, near Nineveh, which covered half a square mile of land and was
embellished with more than a mile of sculpted reliefs. The profits of
conquest financed a rich and splendid court. Ashurbanipal (668–626 BC) also
left his monuments (including obelisks carried off to Nineveh from Thebes),
but he was a man with a taste for learning and antiquities and his finest relic
is what survives of the great collection of tablets he made for his library. In it
he accumulated copies of all that he could discover of the records and

literature of ancient Mesopotamia. It is to these copies that we owe much of
our knowledge of Mesopotamian literature, among them the Epic of
Gilgamesh in its fullest edition, a translation made from Sumerian. The ideas
that moved this civilization are thus fairly accessible from literature as well
as from other sources. The frequent representation of Assyrian kings as
hunters may be a part of the image of the warrior-king, but may also form
part of a conscious identification of the king with legendary conquerors of
nature who had been the heroes of a remote Sumerian past.
The stone reliefs which commemorate the great deeds of Assyrian kings
also repeat, monotonously, another tale – that of sacking, enslavement,
impalement, torture and the final solution of mass deportation. Assyrian
empire had a brutal foundation of conquest and intimidation. It was made
possible by the creation of the best army up to this time. Fed by conscription
of all males and armed with iron weapons, it also had siege artillery able to
breach walls until this time impregnable, and even some mailed cavalry. It
was a coordinated force of all arms. Perhaps, too, it had a special religious
fervour. The god Assur is shown hovering over the armies as they go to
battle and to him kings reported their victories over unbelievers.
Whatever the fundamental explanation of Assyrian success, it quickly
waned. Possibly, empire put too great a strain on Assyrian numbers. The year
after Ashurbanipal died, the empire began to crumble, the first sign being a
revolt in Babylon. The rebels were supported by the Chaldeans and also by a
great new neighbour, the kingdom of the Medes, now the leading Iranian
people. Their entrance as a major power on the stage of history marks an
important change. The Medes had hitherto been distracted by having to deal
with yet another wave of barbarian invaders from the north, the Scythians,
who poured down into Iran from the Caucasus (and at the same time down
the Black Sea coast towards Europe). These were light cavalrymen, fighting
with the bow from horseback, and the first major eruption into western Asia
of a new force in world history, nomadic peoples straight from Central Asia.
It took time to come to terms with them in the seventh century. Like all other
great invasions, the Scythian advance pushed other peoples before them (the
kingdom of Phrygia was overrun by one of these). Meanwhile, the last of the
political units of the Near East based on the original Caucasian inhabitants
was gobbled up by Scyths, Medes or Assyrians. All this took a century and
more, but amounted to a great clearing of the stage. The instability and
fragmentation of the periphery of the Fertile Crescent had long favoured

Assyria; it ceased to do so when Scyths and Medes joined forces. This
pushed Assyria over the edge and gave the Babylonians independence again;
Assyria passes from history with the sack of Nineveh by the Medes in 612
BC.
This thunderbolt was not quite the end of the Mesopotamian tradition.
Assyria’s collapse left the Fertile Crescent open to new masters. The north
was seized by the Medes, who pushed across Anatolia until halted at the
borders of Lydia and at last drove the Scyths back into Russia. An Egyptian
pharaoh made a grab at the south and the Levant, but was defeated by a
Babylonian king, Nebuchadnezzar, who gave Mesopotamian civilization an
Indian summer of grandeur and a last Babylonian empire, which more than
any other captured the imagination of posterity. It ran from Suez, the Red
Sea and Syria across the border of Mesopotamia and the old kingdom of
Elam (by then ruled by a minor Iranian dynasty called the Achaemenids). If
for nothing else, Nebuchadnezzar would be remembered as the great
conqueror who destroyed Jerusalem in 587 BC after a Jewish revolt and
carried off the tribes of Judah into captivity, using them as he used other
captives, to carry out the embellishment of his capital, whose ‘hanging
gardens’ or terraces were to be remembered as one of the Seven Wonders of
the World. He was the greatest king of his time, perhaps of any time until his
own.
The glory of the empire came to a focus in the cult of Marduk, which was
now at its zenith. At a great New Year festival held each year all the
Mesopotamian gods – the idols and statues of provincial shrines – came
down the rivers and canals to take counsel with Marduk at his temple and
acknowledge his supremacy. Borne down a processional way three-quarters
of a mile long (which was, we are told, probably the most magnificent street
of antiquity) or landed from the Euphrates nearer to the temple, they were
taken into the presence of a statue of the god which, Herodotus reported two
centuries later, was made of two and a quarter tons of gold. No doubt he
exaggerated, but it was indisputably magnificent. The destinies of the whole
world, whose centre was this temple, were then debated by the gods and
determined for another year. Thus theology reflected political reality. The re-
enacting of the drama of creation was the endorsement of Marduk’s eternal
authority, and this was an endorsement of the absolute monarchy of
Babylon. The king had responsibility for assuring the order of the world and
therefore the authority to do so.

It was the last flowering of the Mesopotamian tradition and was soon to
end. More and more provinces were lost under Nebuchadnezzar’s
successors. Then came an invasion in 539 BC by new conquerors from the
east, the Persians, led by the Achaemenids. The passage from worldly pomp
and splendour to destruction had been swift. The book of Daniel telescopes
it in a magnificent closing scene, Belshazzar’s feast. ‘In that night,’ we read,
‘was Belshazzar the king of the Chaldeans slain. And Darius the Median
took the kingdom’ (Daniel 5: 30–31). Unfortunately, this account was only
written 300 years later and it was not quite like that. Belshazzar was neither
Nebuchadnezzar’s son nor his successor as the book of Daniel says, and the
king who took Babylon was called Cyrus. None the less, the emphasis of the
Jewish tradition has a dramatic and psychological truth. In so far as the story
of antiquity has a turning-point, this is it. An independent Mesopotamian
tradition going back to Sumer was over. We are at the edge of a new world.
A Jewish poet summed it up exultantly in the book of Isaiah, where Cyrus
appears as a deliverer to the Jews:
‘Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for
thou shalt no more be called, The lady of kingdoms.’ Isaiah 47: 5

5
The Beginnings of Civilization in Eastern Asia
From the beginnings to the most recent times the centre of gravity of world
history has usually swung about between the Atlantic and Iran. Yet (also
until the most recent times) what went on there had little direct impact
elsewhere. Much of the life of other parts of the world long remained
virtually impervious to the influence of its civilizations and two areas were
especially resistant: India and China. By 1000 BC civilizations had appeared
in these countries which were, in spite of peripheral contacts, quite
independent of the Near East. They were the foundations of splendid and
enduring cultural traditions which were to outlive those of Mesopotamia and
Egypt, and they would each enjoy a huge sphere of influence.
ANCIENT INDIA
Even now, ancient India is still visible and accessible to us in a very direct
sense. At the beginning of the twentieth century, some Indian communities
still lived as all our primeval ancestors must once have lived, by hunting and
gathering. The bullock-cart and the potter’s wheel of many villages today
are, as far as can be seen, much the same as those used 4000 years ago. A
caste-system whose main lines were set by about 1000 BC still regulates the
lives of millions, and even of some Indian Christians and Moslems. Gods
and goddesses whose cults can be traced to the Stone Age are still
worshipped at village shrines.
In some ways, then, ancient India is with us still as is no other ancient
civilization. Yet though such examples of the conservatism of Indian life are
commonplace, the country contains many other things too. The hunter-
gatherers of the early twentieth century were the contemporaries of other
Indians used to travelling in railway trains. The diversity of Indian life is
enormous, but wholly comprehensible given the size and variety of its
setting. The sub-continent is, after all, about the size of Europe and is
divided into regions clearly distinguished by climate, terrain and crops.

There are two great river valleys, the Indus and Ganges systems, in the
north; between them lie desert and arid plains, and to the south the highlands
of the Deccan, largely forested. When written history begins, India’s racial
complexity, too, is already very great: scholars identify six main ethnic
groups. Many others were to arrive later and make themselves at home in the
Indian sub-continent and society, too. All this makes it hard to find a focus.
Yet Indian history has a unity in the fact of its enormous power to absorb
and transform forces playing on it from the outside. This provides a thread to
guide us through the patchy and uncertain illumination of its early stages
which is provided by archaeology and texts long transmitted only by word of
mouth. Its basis is to be found in another fact: India’s large measure of
insulation from the outside world by geography. In spite of her size and
variety, until the oceans began to be opened up in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries India had only to grapple with occasional, though
often irresistible, incursions by alien peoples. To the north and north-west
she was protected by some of the highest mountains in the world; to the east
lay belts of jungle. The other two sides of the sub-continent’s great triangle
opened out into the huge expanses of the Indian ocean. This natural
definition not only channelled and restricted communication with the outside
world, it also gave India a distinctive climate. Much of India does not lie in
the tropics, but none the less that climate is tropical. The mountains keep
away the icy winds of Central Asia; the long coasts open themselves to the
rain-laden clouds which roll in from the oceans and cannot go beyond the
northern ranges. The climatic clock is the annual monsoon, bringing the rain
during the hottest months of the year. It is still the central prop of the
agricultural economy.
Protected in some measure from external forces though she has always
been before modern times, India’s north-western frontier is more open than
her others to the outside world. Baluchistan and the frontier passes were the
most important zones of encounter between India and other peoples right
down to the seventeenth century AD; in civilized times even India’s contacts
with China were first made by this roundabout route (though it is not quite as
roundabout as Mercator’s familiar projection makes it appear). At times, this
north-western region has fallen directly under foreign sway, which is
suggestive when we consider the first Indian civilizations; we do not know
much about the way in which they arose but we know that Sumer and Egypt
antedated them. Mesopotamian records of Sargon I of Akkad report contacts

with a ‘Meluhha’ which scholars have believed to be the Indus valley, the
alluvial plains forming the first natural region encountered by the traveller
once he has entered India. It was there, in rich, heavily forested countryside,
that the first Indian civilizations appeared at the time when, further west, the
great movements of Indo-European peoples were beginning to act as the
levers of history. There may have been more than one stimulus at work.
The evidence also shows that agriculture came later to India than to the
Near East. It, too, can first be traced in the sub-continent in its north-west
corner. There is archaeological evidence of farming in Baluchistan in about
6000 BC. Three thousand years later, signs of settled life on the alluvial
plains and parallels with other river-valley cultures begin to appear. Wheel-
thrown pottery and copper implements begin to be found. All the signs are of
a gradual build-up in intensity of agricultural settlements until true
civilization appears as it did in Egypt and Sumer. But there is the possibility
of direct Mesopotamian influence in the background and, finally, there is at
least a reasonable inference that already India’s future was being shaped by
the coming of new peoples from the north. At a very early date the complex
racial composition of India’s population suggests this, though it would be
rash to be assertive about it.
When at last indisputable evidence of civilized life is available, the change
is startling. One scholar speaks of a cultural ‘explosion’. There may have
been one crucial technological step, the invention of burnt brick (as opposed
to the sun-baked mud brick of Mesopotamia) which made flood control
possible in a flat plain lacking natural stone. Whatever the process, the
outcome was a remarkable civilization which stretched over more than a
quarter-million square miles of the Indus valley, an area greater than either
the Sumerian or Egyptian.
Some have called Indus civilization ‘Harappan’, because one of its great
sites is the city of Harappa on a tributary of the Indus. There is another such
site at Mohenjo-Daro; three others are known. Together they reveal human
beings highly organized and capable of carefully regulated collective works
on a scale equalling those of Egypt and Mesopotamia. There were large
granaries in the cities, and weights and measures seem to have been
standardized over a large area. It is clear that a well-developed culture was
established by 2600 BC and lasted for something like 600 years with very
little change, before declining in the second millennium BC.

The two cities which are its greatest monuments may have contained more
than 30,000 people each. This says much for the agriculture which sustained
them; the region was then far from being the arid zone it later became.
Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa were between two and two and a half miles in
circumference and the uniformity and complexity of their building speaks
for a very high degree of administrative and organizational skill. They each
had a citadel and a residential area; streets of houses were laid out on
rectangular grid plans and made of bricks of standardized sizes. Both the
elaborate and effective drainage systems and the internal layout of the
houses show a strong concern for bathing and cleanliness; in some streets of
Harappa nearly every house has a bathroom. Perhaps it is not fanciful to see
in this some of the first manifestations of what has become an enduring
feature of Indian religion, the bathing and ritual ablutions still so important
to Hindus.
These cities traded far afield and lived an economic life of some
complexity. A great dockyard, connected by a mile-long canal to the sea at
Lothal, 400 miles south of Mohenjo-Daro, suggests the importance of
external exchanges which reached, through the Persian Gulf, as far north as
Mesopotamia. In the Harappan cities themselves evidence survives of
specialized craftsmen drawing their materials from a wide area and
subsequently sending out again across its length and breadth the products of
their skills. This civilization had cotton cloth (the first of which we have
evidence), which was plentiful enough to wrap bales of goods for export
whose cordage was sealed with seals found at Lothal. These seals are part of
our evidence for Harappan literacy; a few inscriptions on fragments of
pottery are all that supplements them and provides the first traces of Indian
writing. The seals, of which about 2500 survive, provide some of our best
clues to Harappan ideas. The pictographs on the seals run from right to left.
Animals often appear on them and may represent six seasons into which the
year was divided. Many ‘words’ on the seals remain unreadable, but it now
seems at least likely that they are part of a language akin to the Dravidian
tongues still used in southern India.
Ideas and techniques from the Indus spread throughout Sind and the
Punjab, and down the west coast of Gujarat. The process took centuries and
the picture revealed by archaeology (some sites are now submerged by the
sea) is too confused for a consistent pattern to emerge. Where its influence
did not reach – the Ganges valley, the other great silt-rich area where large

populations could live, and the south-east – different cultural processes were
at work, but they have left nothing so spectacular behind them. Some of
India’s culture must derive from other sources; there are traces elsewhere of
Chinese influence. But it is hard to be positive. Rice, for example, began to
be grown in India in the Ganges valley; we simply do not know where it
came from, but one possibility is China or South-East Asia, on whose coasts
it was grown from about 3000 BC. Two thousand years later, this crucial item
in Indian diet was used over most of the north.
Nor do we know why the first Indian civilizations began to decline,
though their passing can be roughly dated. The devastating floods of the
Indus or uncontrollable alterations of its course may have wrecked the
delicate balance of the agriculture on its banks. The forests may have been
destroyed by tree-felling to provide fuel for the brick-kilns on which
Harappan building depended. But perhaps there were also other agencies at
work. Skeletons, possibly those of men killed where they fell, were found in
the streets of Mohenjo-Daro. Harappan civilization seems to end in the Indus
valley about 1750 BC and this coincides strikingly with the irruption into
Indian history of one of its great creative forces, invading ‘Aryans’, though
scholars do not favour the idea that invaders destroyed the Indian valley
cities. Perhaps the newcomers entered a land already devastated by over-
exploitation and natural disorders.
