Greek Civilization
Victory over the Persians launched the greatest age of Greek history. Some
have spoken of a ‘Greek miracle’, so high do the achievements of classical
civilization appear. Yet those achievements had as their background a
political history so embittered and poisoned that it ended in the extinction of
the institution which sheltered Greek civilization – the city-state.
Complicated though it is in detail, the story can easily be summarized.
For thirty years after Plataea and Mycale, the war with Persia dragged on,
but as a background to a more important theme, a sharpening rivalry
between Athens and Sparta. Survival assured, the Spartans had gone home
with relief, anxious about their helots. This left Athens undisputed leader of
those states which wanted to press ahead with the liberation of other cities
from the Persians. A confederation called the Delian League was formed
which was to support a common fleet to fight the Persians and command of
it was given to an Athenian. As time passed, the members contributed not
ships but money. Some did not wish to pay up as the Persian danger
declined. Athenian intervention to make sure that they did not default
increased and grew harsher. Naxos, for example, which tried to leave the
alliance, was besieged back into it. The League was turning gradually into an
Athenian empire and the signs were the removal of its headquarters from
Delos to Athens, the use of the tribute money for Athenian purposes, the
imposition of resident Athenian magistrates and the transfer of important
legal cases to Athenian courts. When peace was made with Persia in 449 BC,
the League continued, though its excuse had gone. At its peak, over 150
states were paying tribute to Athens.
Sparta had welcomed the first stages of this process, happy to see others
take up commitments outside its own borders. Like other states, Sparta only
gradually became aware of a changing situation. When they did, this had
much to do with the fact that Athenian hegemony increasingly affected the
internal politics of the Greek states. They were often divided about the
League, the richer, tax-paying citizens resenting the tribute, while the poorer

did not; they did not have to find the money to pay it. When Athenian
interventions occurred they were sometimes followed by internal revolution,
the result of which was often imitation of Athenian institutions. Athens was
herself living through struggles which steadily drove her in the direction of
democracy. By 460 BC, the issue at home was really settled, so that irritation
over her diplomatic behaviour soon came to have an ideological flavour.
Other things, too, may have added to an irritation with Athens. She was a
great trading state and another big trading city, Corinth, felt herself
threatened. The Boeotians were directly the subjects of Athenian aggression,
too. The materials thus accumulated for a coalition against Athens, and
Sparta eventually took the lead in it by joining in war against Athens begun
in 460. Fifteen years of not very determined fighting followed and then a
doubtful peace. It was only after almost another fifteen years, in 431 BC, that
there began the great internal struggle which was to break the back of
classical Greece: the Peloponnesian War.
It lasted, with interruptions, twenty-seven years, until 404 BC. Essentially
it was a struggle of land against sea. On one side was the Spartan League,
with Boeotia, Macedon (an unreliable ally) and Corinth as Sparta’s most
important supporters; they held the Peloponnese and a belt of land separating
Athens from the rest of Greece. Athens’ allies were scattered around the
Aegean shore, in the Ionian cities and the islands, the area it had dominated
since the days of the Delian League. Strategy was dictated by the means
available. Sparta’s army, clearly, was best used to occupy Athenian territory
and then exact submission. The Athenians could not match their enemies on
land. But they had the better navy. This was in large measure the creation of
a great Athenian statesman and patriot, the demagogue Pericles. On the fleet
he based a strategy of abandoning the Athenian countryside to annual
invasion by the Spartans – it was in any case never capable of feeding the
population – and withdrawing the inhabitants to the city and its port, the
Piraeus, to which it was linked by two walls some five miles long, 200 yards
apart. There the Athenians could sit out the war, untroubled by bombardment
or assault, which were beyond the capacities of Greek armies. Their fleet,
still controlling the sea, would assure they were fed in war as in peace, by
imported corn, so that blockade would not be effective.
Things did not work as well as this, because of plague within the city and
the absence of leadership after Pericles’s death in 429 BC, but the basic
sterility of the first ten years of the war rests on this strategical deadlock. It

brought peace for a time in 421 BC, but not a lasting one. Athenian
frustrations found an outlet in the end in a scheme to carry the war further
afield.
In Sicily lay the rich city of Syracuse, the most important colony of
Corinth, herself the greatest of Athens’ commercial rivals. To seize Syracuse
would deeply wound an enemy, finish off a major grain-supplier to the
Peloponnese, and provide immense booty. With this wealth Athens could
hope to build and man a yet bigger fleet and thus achieve a final and
unquestioned supremacy in the Greek world – perhaps the mastery of the
Phoenician city of Carthage and a western Mediterranean hegemony, too.
The result was the disastrous Sicilian Expedition of 415–413 BC. It was
decisive, but as a death-blow to the ambitions of Athens. Half her army and
all her fleet were lost; a period of political upheaval and disunion began at
home. Finally, the defeat once more crystallized the alliance of Athens’
enemies.
The Spartans now sought and obtained Persian help in return for a secret
undertaking that the Greek cities of mainland Asia should again become
vassals of Persia (as they had been before the Persian War). This enabled
them to raise the fleet which could help the Athenian subject cities who
wanted to shake off its imperial control. Military and naval defeat
undermined morale in Athens. In 411 BC an unsuccessful revolution replaced
the democratic regime briefly with an oligarchy. Then there were more
disasters, the capture of the Athenian fleet and, finally, blockade. This time
starvation was decisive. In 404 BC Athens made peace and her fortifications
were slighted.
Formally the story ends here, for what followed was implicit in the
material and psychological damage the leading states of Greece had done to
one another in these bitter years. There followed a brief Spartan hegemony
during which she attempted to prevent the Persians cashing the promissory
note on the Greek Asian cities, but this had to be conceded after a war which
brought a revival of Athenian naval power and the rebuilding of the Long
Walls. In the end, Sparta and Persia had a common interest in preventing a
renaissance of Athenian power and made peace in 387 BC. The settlement
included a joint guarantee of all the other Greek cities except those of Asia.
Ironically, the Spartans soon became as hated as the Athenians had been.
Thebes took the leadership of their enemies. At Leuctra, in 371 BC, to the
astonishment of the rest of Greece, the Spartan army was defeated. It marked

a psychological and military epoch in something of the same way as the
battle of Jena in Prussian history over 2000 years later. The practical
consequences made this clear, too; a new confederation was set up in the
Peloponnese as a counterweight to Sparta on her very doorstep and the
foundation of a revived Messenia in 369 BC was another blow. The new
confederation was a fresh sign that the day of the city-state was passing. The
next half-century would see it all but disappear, but 369 BC is far enough to
take the story for the moment.
Such events would be tragic in the history of any country. The passage
from the glorious days of the struggle against Persia to the Persians’ almost
effortless recouping of their losses, thanks to Greek divisions, is a rounded
drama which must always grip the imagination. Another reason why such
intense interest has been given to it is that it was the subject-matter of an
immortal book, Thucydides’ History of the Peloponnesian War, the first
work of contemporary as well as of scientific history. But the fundamental
explanation why these few years should fascinate us when greater struggles
do not is because we feel that at the heart of the jumble of battles, intrigues,
disasters and glory still lies an intriguing and insoluble puzzle: was there a
squandering of real opportunities after Mycale, or was this long anti-climax
simply a dissipation of an illusion, circumstances having for a moment
seemed to promise more than in fact was possible?
The war years have another startling aspect, too. During them there came
to fruition the greatest achievement in civilization the world had ever seen.
Political and military events then shaped that achievement in certain
directions and in the end limited it and determined what should continue to
the future. This is why the century or so of this small country’s history,
whose central decades are those of the war, is worth as much attention as the
millennial empires of antiquity.
At the outset we should recall how narrow a plinth supported Greek
civilization. There were many Greek states, certainly, and they were
scattered over a large expanse of the Aegean, but even if Macedonia and
Crete were included, the land-surface of Greece would fit comfortably into
England without Wales or Scotland – and of it only about one-fifth could be
cultivated. Of the states, most were tiny, containing not more than 20,000
souls at most; the biggest might have had 300,000. Within them only a small
élite took part in civic life and the enjoyment of what we now think of as
Greek civilization.

The other thing to be clear about at the outset is the essence of that
civilization. The Greeks were far from underrating comfort and the pleasures
of the senses. The physical heritage they left behind set the canons of beauty
in many of the arts for 2000 years. Yet in the end the Greeks are remembered
as poets and philosophers; it is an achievement of the mind that constitutes
their major claim on our attention. This has been recognized implicitly in the
idea of classical Greece, a creation of later ages rather than of the Greeks
themselves. Certainly some Greeks of the fifth and fourth centuries BC saw
themselves as the bearers of a culture which was superior to any other
available, but the force of the classical ideal lies in its being a view from a
later age, one which looked back to Greece and found there standards by
which to assess itself. Later generations saw these standards above all in the
fifth century, in the years following victory over the Persians, but there is a
certain distortion in this. There is also an Athenian bias in such a view, for
the fifth century was the apogee of Athenian cultural success. Nevertheless,
to distinguish classical Greece from what went before – usually named
‘archaic’ or ‘pre-classical’ – makes sense. The fifth century has an objective
unity because it saw a special heightening and intensification of Greek
civilization, even if that civilization was ineradicably tied to the past, ran on
into the future and spilled out over all the Greek world.
That civilization was rooted still in relatively simple economic patterns;
essentially, they were those of the preceding age. No great revolution had
altered it since the introduction of money and for three centuries or so there
were only gradual or specific changes in the direction or materials of Greek
trade. Some markets opened, some closed and the technical arrangements
grew slightly more elaborate as the years went by, but that was all. And trade
between countries and cities was the most advanced economic sector. Below
this level, the Greek economy was still nothing like as complicated as would
now be taken for granted. Barter, for example, persisted for everyday
purposes well into the era of coinage. It also speaks for relatively simple
markets, with only limited demands made on them by the consumer. The
scale of manufacture, too, was small. It has been suggested that at the height
of the craze for the best Athenian pottery not more than 150 craftsmen were
at work making and painting it. We are not dealing with a world of factories;
most craftsmen and traders probably worked as individuals with a few
employees and slaves. Even great building projects, such as the
embellishment of Athens, reveal subcontracting to small groups of workers.

The only exception may have been in mining, where the silver mines of
Laurium in Attica might have been worked by thousands of slaves, though
the arrangements under which this was done – the mines belonged to the
state and were in some way sublet – remain obscure. The heart of the
economy almost everywhere was subsistence agriculture. In spite of the
specialized demand and production of an Athens or a Miletus (which had
something of a name as a producer of woollens) the typical community
depended on the production by small farmers of grain, olives, vines and
timber for the home market.
Such men were the typical Greeks. Some were rich, most of them were
probably poor by modern standards, but even now the Mediterranean climate
makes a relatively low income more tolerable than it would be elsewhere.
Commerce on any scale, and other kinds of entrepreneurial activity, were
likely to be mainly in the hands of metics. They might have considerable
social standing and were often rich men, but, for example in Athens, they
could not acquire land without special permission, though they were liable
for military service (which gives us a little information about their numbers,
for at the beginning of the Peloponnesian War there were some 3000 who
could afford the arms and armour needed to serve as hoplite infantry). The
other male inhabitants of the city-state who were not citizens were either
freemen or slaves.

Women, too, were excluded from citizenship, though it is hazardous to
generalize any further about their legal rights. In Athens, for example, they
could neither inherit nor own property, though both were possible in Sparta,
nor could they undertake a business transaction if more than the value of a
bushel of grain was involved. Divorce at the suit of the wife was, it is true,
available to Athenian women, but it seems to have been rare and was
probably practically much harder to obtain than it was by men, who seem to
have been able to get rid of wives fairly easily. Literary evidence suggests
that wives other than those of rich men lived, for the most part, the lives of
drudges. The social assumptions that governed all women’s behaviour were
very restrictive; even women of the upper classes stayed at home in
seclusion for most of the time. If they ventured out, they had to be
accompanied; to be seen at a banquet put their respectability in question.
Entertainers and courtesans were the only women who could normally
expect a public life; they could enjoy a certain celebrity, but a respectable
woman could not. Significantly, in classical Greece girls were thought
unworthy of education. Such attitudes suggest the primitive atmosphere of
the society out of which they grew, one very different from, say, Minoan
Crete among its predecessors, or later Rome.
So far as sexuality is revealed by literature, Greek marriage and
parenthood could produce deep feeling and as high a mutual regard between
individual men and women as in our own societies. One element in it, which
is nowadays hard to weigh up exactly, was a tolerated and even romanticized
male homosexuality. Convention regulated this. In many Greek cities, it was
acceptable for young upper-class males to have love-affairs with older men
(interestingly, there is much less evidence in Greek literature of homosexual
love between men of the same age). This was not thought to disqualify them
for subsequent heterosexual marriage. Something must be allowed for
fashion in this, but all societies can provide examples of homosexual
relationships which suit many men at one stage of their lives; those of the
ancient Greeks have attracted undue attention, perhaps because of the
absence of inhibitions and controls which made the expression of
homosexual affection improper in other societies and because the general
prestige of their civilization has rubbed off on even its minor embodiments.
At root, it may only have been a function of the restrictions which
segregated and circumscribed the lives of free women.

In this as in everything else we know much more about the behaviour of
an élite than about that of most Greeks. Citizenship, which must oftenhave
spanned very different social levels in practice, is a category too big to
permit generalizations. Even in democratic Athens the kind of man who rose
in public life and of whom, therefore, we read in the records, was usually a
landowner; he was not likely to be a businessman, far less a craftsman. A
craftsman might be important as a member of his group in the assembly, but
he could hardly make his way to leadership. Businessmen may have been
handicapped by the long-ingrained conviction of upper-class Greeks that
trade and industry were no proper occupations for a gentleman, who should
ideally live a life of cultivated leisure based on the revenues of his own
lands. This was a view which was to pass into European tradition with
important effect.
Social history therefore blurs into politics. The Greek preoccupation with
political life – the life of the polis – and the fact that classical Greece is
neatly delimited by two distinct epochs (that of the Persian wars and that of a
new, Macedonian, empire) makes it easy to appreciate the importance of
Greek political history to civilization. Yet to reconstruct it in any complete
sense is impossible. Many, perhaps most, English parishes have records
richer than those we can recover for most of the city-states of Greece. What
can be discovered from the evidence is much of the history of Athens, quite
a lot of that of a few other states, almost nothing of many, and a fairly full
narrative of their relations with one another. Together, these facts provide us
with a pretty clear picture of the political context of classical Greek
civilization, but uncertainty about many of its details.
Athens dominates this picture and so there are considerable risks in
arguing too readily from Athens to what was typical. What we know most
about we often tend to think most important and because some of the
greatest of fifth-century Greeks were Athenians and Athens is one pole of the
great story of the Peloponnesian War, scholars have given its history
enormous attention. Yet we also know that Athens was – to take only two
points – both big and a commercial centre; it was, therefore, untypical in
very important ways.
The temptation to over-value Athens’ cultural importance is less
dangerous. Such a primacy was, after all, recognized at the time. Though
many of the greatest Greeks were not Athenians, and many Greeks rejected
the Athenians’ claims to superiority, Athenians saw themselves as leaders of

Greece. Only a few of the most scrupulous among them hesitated to use the
tribute of the Delian League for embellishing its leading city. Thus were
built the buildings whose ruins still crown the Acropolis, the Parthenon and
Propylaea, but, of course, the money spent on them was available just
because so many Greek states recognized Athens’ paramountcy. This reality
is what the tribute lists record. When on the eve of the Peloponnesian War
Pericles told his countrymen that their state was a model for the rest of
Greece he was indulging in propaganda, but there was also conviction in
what he said.
Solid grounds for the importance traditionally given to Athens ought,
indeed, to be suggested a priori by the basic facts of geography. Her position
recalls the ancient tradition that she played an ill-defined but seemingly
important role in the Ionian plantation of the Aegean and Asia Minor. Easy
access to this region, together with poor agricultural resources, made her a
trading and maritime power early in the sixth century. Thanks to this she was
the richest of the Greek cities; at the end of it the discovery of the silver
deposits of Laurium gave her the windfall with which to build the fleet of
Salamis. From the fleet came her undisputed pre-eminence in the Aegean
and thence, eventually, the tribute which refreshed her treasury in the fifth
century. The peak of her power and wealth was reached just before the
Peloponnesian War, in the years when creative activity and patriotic
inspiration reached their height. Pride in the extension of empire was then
linked to a cultural achievement which was truly enjoyed by the people.
Commerce, the navy, ideological confidence and democracy are themes as
inseparably and traditionally interwoven in the history of fifth-century
Athens as of late nineteenth-century England, though in very different ways.
It was widely recognized at the time that a fleet of ships whose movement
depended ultimately upon about 200 paid oarsmen apiece was both the
instrument of imperial power and the preserve of the democracy. Hoplites
were less important in a naval state than elsewhere, and no expensive armour
was needed to be an oarsman, who would be paid by the tribute of the
League or the proceeds of successful warfare – as it was hoped, for example,
the Sicilian Expedition would prove. Imperialism was genuinely popular
among Athenians who would expect to share its profits, even if only
indirectly and collectively, and not to have to bear its burdens. This was an
aspect of Athenian democracy which was given much attention by its critics.

Attacks on Athenian democracy began in early times and have continued
ever since. They have embodied as much historical misrepresentation as
have over-zealous and idealizing defences of the same institutions. The
misgivings of frightened conservatives who had never seen anything like it
before are understandable, for democracy emerged at Athens unexpectedly
and at first almost unobserved. Its roots lay in sixth-century constitutional
changes which replaced the organizing principle of kinship with that of
locality; in theory and law, at least, local attachment came to be more
important than the family you belonged to. This was a development which
appears to have been general in Greece and it put democracy on the
localized institutional basis which it has usually had ever since. Other
changes followed from this. By the middle of the fifth century all adult
males were entitled to take part in the assembly and through it, therefore, in
the election of major administrative officers. The powers of the Areopagus
were steadily reduced; after 462 BC it was only a lawcourt with jurisdiction
over certain offences. The other courts were at the same time rendered more
susceptible to democratic influence by the institution of payment for jury
service. As they also conducted much administrative business, this meant a
fair amount of popular participation in the daily running of the city. Just after
the Peloponnesian War, when times were hard, pay was also offered for
attendance at the assembly itself. Finally, there was the Athenian belief in
selecting by lot; its use for the choice of magistrates told against hereditary
prestige and power.
At the root of this constitution lay distrust of expertise and entrenched
authority and confidence in collective common sense. From this derived, no
doubt, the relative lack of interest Athenians showed in rigorous
jurisprudence – argument in an Athenian court was occupied much more
with questions of motive, standing and substance, than with questions of law
– and the importance they gave to the skills of oratory. The effective political
leaders of Athens were those who could sway their fellow citizens by their
words. Whether we call them demagogues or orators does not matter; they
were the first politicians seeking power by persuasion.
Towards the end of the fifth century, though even then by no means
usually, some such men came from families outside the traditional ruling
class. The continuing importance of old political families was nevertheless
an important qualification of the democratic system. Themistocles at the
beginning of the century and Pericles when the war began were members of

old families, their birth making it proper for them even in the eyes of
conservatives to take the lead in affairs; the old ruling classes found it easier
to accept democracy because of this practical qualification of it. There is a
rough parallel in the grudging acceptance of Whig reform by nineteenth-
century English aristocrats; government in Athens as in Victorian England
remained for a long time in the hands of men whose forefathers might have
expected to rule the state in more aristocratic days. Another tempering
qualification was provided by the demands of politics on time and money.
Though jurors and members of the assembly might be paid, the fee for
attendance was small; it seems to have been prompted, too, by the need to
make sure of a quorum, which does not suggest that the assembly found it
easy to get the mass of the citizens to attend. Many of them must have lived
too far away and it has been calculated that not more than about one in eight
of them were present at the usual statutory meetings, of which some forty
were held each year. These facts tend to be lost to sight both in the
denunciation and the idealization of Athenian democracy and they go some
way to explaining its apparent mildness. Taxation was light and there was
little discriminatory legislation against the rich, such as we would now
associate with democratic rule and such as Aristotle said would be the
inevitable result of the rule of the poor.
Even in its emergent period Athenian democracy was identified with
adventure and enterprise in foreign policy. Popular demand lay behind
support for the Greek cities of Asia in their revolt against Persia. Later, for
understandable reasons, it gave foreign policy an anti-Spartan bias. The
struggle against the Areopagus was led by Themistocles, the builder of the
Athenian fleet of Salamis, who had sensed a potential danger from Sparta
from the moment the Persian War was over. Thus the responsibility for the
Peloponnesian War, and for its exacerbation of the factions and divisions of
all the other cities of Greece, came to be laid at the door of democracy. It not
only brought disaster upon Athens itself, its critics pointed out, but exported
to or at least awoke in all the Greek cities the bitterness of faction and social
conflict. Oligarchy was twice restored in Athens – not that it helped matters
– and by the end of the century faith in Athenian democracy was grievously
weakened. Thucydides could take his history only down to 411 BC but it
closes in misgiving and disillusion over his native city – which had exiled
him – and Plato was to imprint for ever upon the Athenian democrats the
stigma of the execution of his teacher Socrates in 399 BC.

If Athenian democracy’s exclusion of women, metics and slaves is also
placed in the scale, the balance against it seems heavy; to modern eyes, it
looks both narrow and disastrously unsuccessful. Yet it should not disqualify
Athens for the place she later won in the regard of posterity. Anachronistic
and invalid comparisons are too easy; Athens is not to be compared with
ideals still imperfectly realized after two thousand years, but with her
contemporaries. For all the survival of the influence of the leading families
and the practical impossibility that even a majority of its members would
turn up to any particular meeting of the assembly, more Athenians were
engaged in self-government than was the case in any other state. Athenian
democracy more than any other institution brought about the liberation of
men from the political ties of kin which is one of the great Greek
achievements. Many who could not have contemplated office elsewhere
could experience in Athens the political education of taking responsible
decisions which is the heart of political culture. Men of modest means could
help to run the institutions which nurtured and protected Athens’ great
civilized achievement. They listened to arguments of an elevation and
thoughtfulness which make it impossible to dismiss them as mere rhetoric;
they must surely have weighed them seriously sometimes. Just as the
physical divisions between the old Greek communities fostered a variety of
experience which led in the end to a break with the world of god-given rulers
and a grasp of the idea that political arrangements could be consciously
chosen, so the stimulus of participation in affairs worked on unprecedentedly
large numbers of men in classical Athens, not only in the assembly, but in
the daily meetings of the people’s council which prepared its business. Even
without the eligibility of all citizens for office Athenian democracy would
still have been the greatest instrument of political education contrived down
to that time.
It is against that background that the errors, vanities and misjudgements of
Athenian politics must be seen. We do not cease to treasure the great
achievements of British political culture because of the shallowness and
corruptness of much of twentieth-century democracy. Athens may be judged,
like any political system, by its working at its best; under the leadership of
Pericles it was outstanding. It left to posterity the myth of the individual’s
responsibility for his own political fate. We need myths in politics and have
yet to find one better.

The Athenians, in any case, would have been uninterested in many
modern criticisms of their democracy. Its later defenders and attackers have
both often fallen into another sort of anachronism, that of misinterpreting the
goals Greeks thought worth achieving. Greek democracy, for example, was
far from being dominated, as is ours, by the mythology of cooperativeness,
and cheerfully paid a larger price in destructiveness than would be
welcomed today. There was a blatant competitiveness in Greek life apparent
from the Homeric poems onwards. Greeks admired men who won and
thought men should strive to win. The consequent release of human power
was colossal, but also dangerous. The ideal expressed in the much-used
word which we inadequately translate as ‘virtue’ illustrates this. When
Greeks used it, they meant that people were able, strong, quickwitted, as
much as they were just, principled, or virtuous in a modern sense. Homer’s
hero, Odysseus, frequently behaved like a rogue, but he is brave and clever
and he succeeds; he is therefore admirable. To show such quality was good;
it did not matter that the social cost might sometimes be high. The Greek
was concerned with image; his culture taught him to avoid shame rather than
guilt and the fear of shame was never far from the fear of public evidence of
guilt. Some of the explanation of the bitterness of faction in Greek politics
lies here; it was a price willingly paid.
When all is said, Athenian democracy must be respected above all for
what it cradled, a series of cultural triumphs which are peaks even in the
history of Greek civilization. These were public facts. The art of Athens was
applauded and sustained by many men; the tragedies were tested not by the
takings of a box office but by judges interpreting a public taste vigorously
expressed. The sculptor Phidias worked to beautify the city and not for an
individual patron. And as democracy degenerated, so it seems, there was a
waning of artistic nerve. This was a loss to the whole of Greece.
The achievement which made Greece teacher of Europe (and through it of
the world) is too rich and varied to generalize about even in long and close
study; it is impossible to summarize in a page or so. But there is a salient
theme which emerges in it: a growing confidence in rational, conscious
enquiry. If civilization is advance towards the control of mentality and
environment by reason, then the Greeks did more for it than any of their
predecessors. They invented the philosophical question as part and parcel of
one of the great intuitions of all time, that a coherent and logical explanation
of things could be found, that the world did not ultimately rest upon the

meaningless and arbitrary fiat of gods or demons. Put like that, of course, it
is not an attitude which could be or was grasped by all, or even by most,
Greeks. It was an attitude which had to make its way in a world permeated
with irrationality and superstition. Nevertheless, it was a revolutionary and
beneficial idea. It looked forward to the possibility of a society where such
an attitude would be generalized; even Plato, who thought it impossible that
most men could share it, gave to the rulers of his ideal state the task of
rational reflection as the justification both of their privileges and of the
discipline laid upon them. The Greek challenge to the weight of irrationality
in social and intellectual activity tempered its force as it had never been
tempered before. For all the subsequent exaggeration and myth-making
about it, the liberating effect of this emphasis was felt again and again for
thousands of years. It was the greatest single Greek achievement.
This was so big a revolution in modes of thought in the Aegean that it now
obscures its own scale. So remarkable are the works of the Greek
intellectuals and so large have they loomed that it requires effort to penetrate
through them to the values of the world from which they emerged. It is made
a little easier because no such revolution is ever complete. A look at the
other side of the coin reveals that most Greeks continued to live in cocoons
of traditional irrationality and superstition; even those who were in a
position to understand something of the speculations which were opening
new mental worlds rarely accepted the implications. A continuing respect
was shown to the old public orthodoxies. It was impiety in late fifth-century
Athens, for example, to deny belief in the gods. One philosopher believed
that the sun was a red-hot disc; it did not protect him that he had been the
friend of Pericles when he said so, and he had to flee. It was at Athens, too,
that public opinion was convulsed, on the eve of the Sicilian Expedition, by
the mysterious and ominous mutilation of certain public statues, the
‘Hermae’, or busts of Hermes. The disasters which followed were attributed
by some to this sacrilege. Socrates, the Athenian philosopher who became,
thanks to his pupil Plato, the archetypal figure of the man of intellect, and
left as a maxim the view that ‘the unexamined life is not worth living’,
offended the pieties of his state and was condemned to die for it by his
fellow citizens; he was also condemned for questioning received astronomy.
It does not seem that similar trials took place elsewhere, but they imply a
background of popular superstition which must have been more typical of
the Greek community than the presence of a Socrates.

In spite of such important historical residues, Greek thought, more than
that of any earlier civilization, reflected changes of emphasis and fashion.
They arose from its own dynamism and did not always lead to a greater
ability to grapple with nature and society rather than surrender to them, but
sometimes to dead ends and blind alleys, to exotic and extravagant fantasies.
Greek thought is not monolithic; we should think not of a bloc with a unity
pervading all its parts, but of a historical continuum extending across three
or four centuries, in which different elements are prominent at different
times, and which is hard to assess.
One reason for this is that Greek categories of thought – the way, so to
speak, in which they laid out the intellectual map before beginning to think
about its individual components in detail at all – are not our own, though
often deceptively like them. Some of those we use did not exist for the
Greeks and their knowledge led them to draw different boundaries between
fields of enquiry from those which we take for granted. Sometimes this is
obvious and presents no difficulties; when a philosopher, for example,
locates the management of the household and its estate (economics) as a part
of a study of what we should call politics, we are not likely to misunderstand
him. In more abstract topics it can cause trouble.
One example is to be found in Greek science. For us, science seems to be
an appropriate way of approaching the understanding of the physical
universe, and its techniques are those of empirical experiment and
observation. Greek thinkers found the nature of the physical universe just as
approachable through abstract thought, as through metaphysics, logic and
mathematics. It has been said that Greek rationality actually came in the end
to stand in the way of scientific progress, because enquiry followed logic
and abstract deduction, rather than the observation of nature. Among the
great Greek philosophers, only Aristotle gave prominence to collecting and
classifying data, and he did this for the most part only in his social and
biological studies. This is one reason for not separating the history of Greek
science and philosophy too violently. They are a whole, the product of scores
of cities and developing across four centuries or so in time.
Their beginnings constitute a revolution in human thought and it has
already taken place when there appear the earliest Greek thinkers of whom
we have information. They lived in the Ionian city of Miletus in the seventh
and sixth centuries BC. Important intellectual activity went on there and in
other Ionian cities right down to the remarkable age of Athenian speculation

which begins with Socrates. No doubt the stimulus of an Asian background
was important here as in so many other ways in getting things started; it may
also have been significant that Miletus was a rich place; early thinkers seem
to have been rich men who could afford the time to think. None the less, the
early emphasis on Ionia gives way before long to a spectrum of intellectual
activity going on all over the Greek world. The western settlements of
Magna Graecia and Sicily were crucial in many sixth- and fifth-century
developments, and primacy in the later Hellenistic age was to go to
Alexandria. The whole Greek world was involved in the success of the
Greek mind and even the great age of Athenian questioning should not be
given exaggerated standing within it.
In the sixth century BC Thales and Anaximander launched at Miletus the
conscious speculation about the nature of the universe which shows that the
crucial boundary between myth and science has been crossed. Egyptians had
set about the practical manipulation of nature and had learned much
inductively in the process, while Babylonians had made important
measurements. The Miletan school made good use of this information, and
possibly took more fundamental cosmological notions from the old
civilizations, too; Thales is said to have held that the earth had its origin in
water. Yet the Ionian philosophers soon went beyond their inheritance. They
set out a general view of the nature of the universe which replaced myth with
impersonal explanation. This is more impressive than the fact that the
specific answers they put forward were in the end to prove unfruitful. The
Greek analysis of the nature of matter is an example. Although an atomic
theory was adumbrated which was over 2000 years before its time, this was
by the fourth century rejected in favour of a view, based on that of the early
Ionian thinkers, that all matter was composed of four ‘elements’ – air, water,
earth, fire – which combined in different proportions in different substances.
This theory subsequently shaped western science down to the Renaissance.
It was of enormous historical importance because of the boundaries it set and
the possibilities it opened. It was also, of course, erroneous.
This should be firmly kept in place as a secondary consideration at this
point. What mattered about the Ionians and the school they founded was
what has rightly been called their ‘astonishing’ novelty. They pushed aside
gods and demons from the understanding of nature. Time was to overwhelm
some of what they had done, it is true. In Athens in the late fifth century
more than a temporary alarm in the face of defeat and danger has been seen

in the condemnation as blasphemous of views far less daring than those of
Ionian thinkers two centuries before. One of them had said ‘If the ox could
paint a picture, his god would look like an ox’; a few centuries later,
classical Mediterranean civilization has lost much of such perceptiveness. Its
early appearance is the most striking sign of the vigour of Greek civilization.
Not only popular superstition swamped such ideas. Other philosophical
tendencies also played a part. One coexisted with the Ionian tradition for a
long time and was to have much longer life and influence. Its crux was the
view that reality was immaterial, that, as Plato later put it in one of its most
persuasive expressions, in life we experience only the images of pure Form
and Ideas which are the heavenly embodiments of true reality. That reality
was only to be apprehended by thought, though not only by systematic
speculation, but by intuition too. For all its immateriality, this kind of
thinking also had its roots in Greek science, though not in the speculations of
the Ionians about matter but in the activities of mathematicians.
Some of their greatest advances were not to be made until long after
Plato’s death, when they would round off what is the single biggest triumph
of Greek thought, its establishment of most of the arithmetic and geometry
which served western civilization down to the seventeenth century. Every
schoolboy used to know the name of Pythagoras, who lived at Crotone in
southern Italy in the middle of the sixth century and may be said to have
founded the deductive proof. Fortunately or unfortunately, he did more than
this. He discovered the mathematical basis of harmonics by studying a
vibrating string and he became especially interested in the relationship of
numbers and geometry. His approach to them was semi-mystical;
Pythagoras, like many mathematicians, was a religiously minded man who is
said to have celebrated the satisfactory conclusion of his famous proof by
sacrificing an ox. His school – there was a secret Pythagorean ‘Brotherhood’
– later came to hold that the ultimate nature of the universe was
mathematical and numerical. ‘They fancied that the principles of
mathematics were the principles of all things,’ reported Aristotle, somewhat
disapprovingly, yet his own teacher, Plato, had been greatly influenced by
this belief, and by the scepticism of Parmenides, an early fifth-century
Pythagorean, about the world known to the senses. Numbers seemed more
attractive than the physical world; they possessed both the defined perfection
and the abstraction of the Idea which embodied reality.

Pythagorean influence on Greek thought is an immense subject;
fortunately, it need not be summarized. What matters here is its ultimate
repercussions in a view of the universe which, because it was constructed on
mathematical and deductive principles, rather than from observation, fixed
astronomy on the wrong lines for nearly 2000 years. From it came the vision
of a universe built up of successively enclosing spheres on which moved
sun, moon and planets in a fixed and circular pattern about the earth. The
Greeks noticed that this did not seem to be the way the heavens moved in
practice. But – to summarize crudely – appearances were saved by
introducing more and more refinements into the basic scheme while refusing
to scrutinize the principles from which it was deduced. The final
elaborations were not achieved until work in the second century AD by a
famous Alexandrian, Ptolemy. These efforts were remarkably successful, and
only a few dissentients demurred (which shows that other intellectual
outcomes were possible in Greek science). For all the inadequacies of
Ptolemy’s system, predictions of planetary movement could be made which
would still serve as adequate guides for oceanic navigation in the age of
Columbus, even if they rested on misconceptions which sterilized
cosmological thinking until his day.
Both the theory of the four elements and the development of Greek
astronomy illustrate the deductive bias of Greek thought and its
characteristic weakness, its urge to set out a plausible theory to account for
the widest possible range of experience without submitting it to the test of
experiment. It affected most fields of thought which we now think to be
covered by science and philosophy. Its fruits were on the one hand argument
of unprecedented rigour and acuteness and on the other an ultimate
scepticism about sense-data. Only the Greek doctors, led by the fifth-century
Hippocrates, made much of empiricism.
In the case of Plato – and, for good or ill, philosophical discussion has
been shaped more by him and his pupil Aristotle than by any other two men
– this bias may have been reinforced by his low opinion of what he
observed. By birth an aristocratic Athenian, Plato turned away from the
world of practical affairs in which he had hoped to take part, disillusioned
with the politics of the Athenian democracy and, in particular, with its
treatment of Socrates, whom it had condemned to death. From Socrates
Plato had learnt not only his Pythagoreanism but an idealist approach to
ethical questions, and a technique of philosophical enquiry. The Good, he

thought, was discoverable by enquiry and intuition; it was reality. It was the
greatest of a series of ‘ideas’ – Truth, Beauty, Justice were others – which
were not ideas in the sense that at any moment they had shape in anyone’s
mind (as one might say ‘I have an idea about that’), but were real entities,
enjoying a real existence in a world fixed and eternal, of which such ideas
were the elements. This world of changeless reality, thought Plato, was
hidden from us by the senses, which deceived us and misled us. But it was
accessible to the soul, which could understand it by the use of reason.
Such ideas had a significance going far beyond technical philosophy. In
them (as in the doctrines of Pythagoras) can be found, for example, traces of
a familiar later idea, fundamental to puritanism, that man is irreconcilably
divided between the soul, of divine origin, and the body which imprisons it.
Not reconciliation, but the victory of one or another, must be the outcome. It
was an idea which would pass into Christianity with enormous effect.
Immediately, too, Plato had an intensely practical concern since he believed
that knowledge of the Ideal world of universals and reality could be helped
or hindered by the arrangements under which men lived. He set out his
views in a series of dialogues between Socrates and people who came to
argue with him. They were the first textbooks of philosophical thinking and
the one we call The Republic was the first book in which anyone had ever set
out a scheme for a society directed and planned to achieve an ethical goal. It
describes an authoritarian state (reminiscent of Sparta) in which marriages
would be regulated to produce the best genetic results, families and private
property would not exist, culture and the arts would be censored and
education carefully supervised. The few who ruled this state would be those
of sufficient intellectual and moral stature to fit them for the studies which
would enable them to realize the just society in practice by apprehending the
Ideal world. Like Socrates, Plato held that wisdom was the understanding of
reality and he assumed that to see truth ought to make it impossible not to
act in accordance with it. Unlike his teacher, he held that for most people
education and the laws should impose exactly that unexamined life which
Socrates had thought not worth living.
The Republic and its arguments were to provoke centuries of discussion
and imitation, but this was true of almost all Plato’s work. As a twentieth-
century English philosopher put it, practically all subsequent philosophy in
the West was a series of footnotes to Plato. In spite of Plato’s distaste for
what he saw about him and the prejudice it engendered in him, he

anticipated almost all the great questions of philosophy, whether they
concerned morals, aesthetics, the basis of knowledge, or the nature of
mathematics, and he set out his ideas in great works of literature, which have
always been read with pleasure and excitement.
The Academy which Plato founded has some claim to be the first
university. From it emerged his pupil Aristotle, a thinker more
comprehensive and balanced, less sceptical of the possibilities of the actual,
and less adventurous than he. Aristotle never altogether rejected his master’s
teaching but he departed from it in fundamental ways. He was a great
classifier and collector of data (with a special interest in biology) and did not
reject sense experience as did Plato. Indeed, he sought both firm knowledge
and happiness in the world of experience, rejecting the notion of universal
ideas and arguing inductively from facts to general laws. Aristotle was so
rich a thinker and interested in so many sides of experience that his historical
influence is as hard to delimit as that of Plato. What he wrote provided a
framework for the discussion of biology, physics, mathematics, logic,
literary criticism, aesthetics, psychology, ethics and politics for 2000 years.
He provided ways of thinking about these subjects and approaches to them
which were elastic and capacious enough eventually to contain Christian
philosophy. He also founded a science of deductive logic which was not
displaced until the end of the nineteenth century. It is a vast achievement,
different in kind but not less important than that of Plato.
Aristotle’s political thinking was in one sense in agreement with Plato’s:
the city-state was the best conceivable social form, but required reform and
purification to work properly, he thought. But beyond this point he diverged
greatly from his master. Aristotle saw the proper working of the polis as
being that which would give each of its parts the role appropriate to it and
that was essentially for him a matter of understanding what led in most
existing states to happiness. In formulating an answer, he made use of a
Greek idea to which his teaching was to give long life, that of the Mean, the
idea that excellence lay in a balance between extremes. The empirical facts
seemed to confirm this and Aristotle assembled greater quantities of such
evidence in a systematic form than any predecessor, it seems; but in stressing
the importance of facts about society, he had been anticipated by another
Greek invention, that of history.
This was another major achievement. In most countries, chronicles or
annals which purport simply to record successions of events precede history.

In Greece, this was not so. Historical writing in Greek emerged from poetry.
Amazingly, it at once reached its highest level in its first embodiments – two
books by masters who were never equalled by their successors. The first of
them, Herodotus, has reasonably been termed ‘the father of history’. The
word – historie – existed before him; it meant enquiry. Herodotus gave it an
added meaning, that of enquiry about events in time, and in putting down the
results wrote the first prose work of art in a European language which
survives. His stimulus was a wish to understand a near-contemporary fact,
the great struggle with Persia. He accumulated information about the Persian
Wars and their antecedents by reading a huge mass of the available literature
and by interrogating people on his travels and assiduously recording what he
was told and read. For the first time, these things became the subject of more
than a chronicle. The result is his Histories, a remarkable account of the
Persian empire, with, built into it, much information about early Greek
history and a sort of world survey, followed by an account of the Persian
Wars down to Mycale. He spent much of his life travelling, having been born
(it was traditionally said) in the Dorian town of Halicarnassus in south-west
Asia Minor in 484 BC. At one point he came to Athens where he remained
for a few years living as a metic, and while there he may have been rewarded
for public recitations of his work. He went later to a new colony in south
Italy; there he completed his work and died, a little after 430 BC. He
therefore knew something by experience of the whole spread of the Greek
world and travelled in Egypt and elsewhere as well. Thus wide experience
lay behind his great book, an account scrupulously based on witnesses, even
if Herodotus sometimes treated them somewhat credulously.
It is usually conceded that one of the superiorities of Thucydides,
Herodotus’s greater successor, was his more rigorous approach to reports of
fact and his attempts to control them in a critical way. The result is a more
impressive intellectual achievement, though its austerity throws into even
stronger relief the charm of Herodotus’s work. Thucydides’s subject was
even more contemporary – the Peloponnesian War. The choice reflected
deep personal involvement and a new conception. Thucydides was a
member of a leading Athenian family (he served as a general until disgraced
for an alleged failure in command) and he wanted to discover the causes
which had brought his city and Greece into their dreadful plight. He shared
with Herodotus a practical motive, for the thought (as most Greek historians
were to do after him) that what he found out would have practical value, but

he sought not merely to describe, but to explain. The result is one of the
most striking pieces of historical analysis ever written and the first ever to
seek to penetrate through different levels of explanation. In the process he
provided a model of disinterested judgement to future historians, for his
Athenian loyalties rarely obtrude. The book was not completed – it takes the
story only to 411 BC – but the overall judgement is concise and striking: ‘the
growth of Athens’ power and Sparta’s fear was, in my view, the cause which
compelled them to go to war’.
The invention of history is itself evidence of the new intellectual range of
the literature created by the Greeks. It is the first complete one known to
man. The Jewish is almost as comprehensive, but contains neither drama nor
critical history, let alone the lighter genres. But Greek literature shares with
the Bible a primacy shaping the whole of subsequent western writing.
Besides its positive content, it imposed the major forms of literature and the
first themes of a criticism by which to judge them.
From the beginning, as Homer shows, it was closely linked to religious
belief and moral teaching. Hesiod, a poet who probably lived in the late
eighth century and is usually considered to be the first Greek poet of the
post-epic age, consciously addressed himself to the problem of justice and
the nature of the gods, thus confirming the tradition that literature was for
more than enjoyment and setting out one of the great themes of Greek
literature for the next four centuries. For the Greeks, poets were always
likely to be seen as teachers, their work suffused with mystical overtones,
inspiration. Yet there were to be many poets, many styles of poetry in Greek.
The first which can be distinguished is writing in a personal vein which was
to the taste of aristocratic society. But as private patronage became
concentrated during the era of the tyrants, so it passed slowly into the
collective and civic area. The tyrants deliberately fostered the public
festivals which were to be vehicles of the greatest specimens of Greek
literary art, the tragedies. The drama’s origins lie everywhere in religion and
its elements must have been present in every civilization. The ritual of
worship is the first theatre. Yet there, too, the Greek achievement was to
press this towards conscious reflection on what was going forward; more
was to be expected of the audience than passive resignation or orgiastic
possession. The didactic impulse emerges in it.
The first form of the Greek drama was the dithyramb, the choral song
recited at the festivals of Dionysus, together with dance and mime. In 535

BC, we are told, this was the subject of a crucial innovation, when Thespis
added to it an individual actor whose speech was some kind of antiphone to
the chorus. Further innovation and more actors followed and within a
hundred years we have reached the full, mature theatre of Aeschylus,
Sophocles and Euripides. Of their work thirty-three plays survive (including
one complete trilogy), but we know that more than three hundred different
tragedies were performed in the fifth century. In this drama the religious
undertone is still there, though not so much in the words as in the occasions
at which they would have been performed. The great tragedies were
sometimes performed in trilogies at civic festivals attended by citizens who
were already familiar with the basic stories (often mythological) they had
come to see. This, too, suggests the educational effect. Probably most Greeks
never saw a play by Aeschylus; certainly an infinitesimally small number by
comparison with the number of modern Englishmen who have seen a play of
Shakespeare. None the less, those who were not too busy on their farms, or
too far away, provided a large audience.
More men than in any other ancient society were thus able and
encouraged to scrutinize and reflect upon the content of their own moral and
social world. What they expected was a revealing emphasis in familiar rites,
a new selection from their meaning. This is what the great dramatists mostly
gave them, even if some plays went beyond this and some even, at
favourable moments, satirized the social pieties. It was not, of course, a
naturalistic picture that was presented, but the operation of the laws of a
heroic, traditional world and their agonizing impact on individuals caught in
their working. In the second half of the fifth century Euripides had even
begun to use the conventional tragic form as a vehicle for questioning
conventional assumptions; thus he inaugurated a technique to be exploited in
the western theatre by authors as late and as different as Gogol and Ibsen.
The framework provided by plot, though, was familiar, and at its heart lay a
recognition of the weight of inexorable law and nemesis. The acceptance of
this setting may be thought, in the last resort, to be testimony to the irrational
rather than the rational side of the Greek mind. Yet it was a long way from
the state of mind in which the congregation of an eastern temple fearfully or
hopefully witnessed the round of unchanging ritual and sacrifice.
In the fifth century the scope of the theatre was also broadening in other
ways. This was when Attic comedy developed as a form in its own right, and
found in Aristophanes its first great manipulator of men and events for

others’ amusement. His material was often political, almost always highly
topical, and frequently scurrilous. His survival and success is the most
striking evidence we possess of the tolerance and freedom of Athenian
society. A hundred years later, we have almost reached the modern world in
a fashion for plays about the intrigues of slaves and troubled love-affairs. It
has not the impact of Sophocles, but it can still amuse and remains a near-
miracle, for there had been nothing like it two hundred years before. The
rapidity with which Greek literature grew after the age of epic poetry and its
enduring power is evidence of Greek powers of innovation and mental
development, which is easy to appreciate even when we cannot explain it.
Literature at the end of the classical age still had a long and important life
ahead when the city-states disappeared. It had a growing audience, for Greek
was to become both lingua franca and an official language over all the Near
East and much of the Mediterranean. It was not to reach again the heights of
Athenian tragedy, but it was still to show us masterpieces. The sense of
decline in the visual arts is more apparent. Here, above all in monumental
architecture and the nude, Greece had again set standards for the future.
From the first borrowings from Asia a wholly original architecture was
evolved, the classical style whose elements are still consciously evoked even
by the austerities of twentieth-century builders. Within a few hundred years
it spread over much of the world from Sicily to India; in this art, too, the
Greeks were cultural exporters.
They were in one respect favoured by geology, for Greece contained much
high-quality stone. Its durability is attested by the magnificence of the relics
we look at today. Yet there is an illusion in this. The purity and austerity with
which fifth-century Athens speaks to us in the Parthenon conceals its image
in Greek eyes. We have lost the garish statues of gods and goddesses, the
paint and ochre and the clutter of monuments, shrines and stelae that must
have encumbered the Acropolis and obscured the simplicity of its temples.
The reality of many great Greek centres may have been more like, say,
modern Lourdes; in approaching, for example, the Temple of Apollo at
Delphi; the impression gained can easily be of a jumble of untidy little
shrines cluttered by traders, booths, and the rubbish of superstition (though
we must also make allowances for the contribution made by the
archaeologist’s fragmentary discoveries to this).
None the less, this qualification made, the erosion of time has allowed a
beauty of form which is almost unequalled to emerge from the superficial

experience. There is no possibility here of discounting the interplay of
judgement of the object with standards of judgement which derive ultimately
from the object itself. It remains simply true that to have originated an art
that has spoken so deeply and powerfully to men’s minds across such ages is
itself not easily interpreted except as evidence of an unsurpassed artistic
greatness and an astonishing skill in giving it expression.
This quality is also present in Greek sculpture. Here, too, the presence of
good stone was an advantage, and the original influence of oriental, often
Egyptian, models important. Like pottery, the eastern models once absorbed,
sculpture evolved towards greater naturalism. The supreme subject of the
Greek sculptors was the human form, portrayed no longer as a memorial or
cult object, but for its own sake. Again it is not always possible to be sure of
the finished statue the Greeks saw; these figures were often gilded, painted
or decorated with ivory and precious stones. Some bronzes have undergone
looting or melting down, so that the preponderance of stone may itself be
misleading. Their evidence, though, records a clear evolution. We begin with
statues of gods and of young men and women whose identity is often
unknown, simply and symmetrically presented in poses not too far removed
from those of the Orient. In the classical figures of the fifth century,
naturalism begins to tell in an uneven distribution of weight and the
abandonment of the simple frontal stance and to evolve towards the mature,
human style of Praxiteles and the fourth century in which the body – and for
the first time the female nude – is treated.
A great culture is more than a mere museum and no civilization can be
reduced to a catalogue. For all its élite quality, the achievement and
importance of Greece comprehended all sides of life; the politics of the city-
state, a tragedy of Sophocles and a statue by Phidias are all part of it. Later
ages grasped this intuitively, happily ignorant of the conscientious
discrimination which historical scholarship was eventually to make possible
between periods and places. This was a fruitful error, because in the end
what Greece was to be thought to be was as important to the future as what
she was. The meaning of the Greek experience was to be represented and
reinterpreted, and ancient Greece was to be rediscovered and reconsidered
and, in different ways, reborn and re-used, for more than two thousand years.
For all the ways in which reality had fallen short of later idealization and for
all the strength of its ties with the past, Greek civilization was quite simply
the most important extension of humanity’s grasp of its destiny down to that

time. Within four centuries, Greece had invented philosophy, politics, most
of arithmetic and geometry, and the categories of western art. It would be
enough, even if her errors too had not been so fruitful. Europe has drawn
interest on the capital Greece has laid down ever since, and through Europe
the rest of the world has traded on the same account.

4
The Hellenistic World
The history of Greece rapidly becomes less interesting after the fifth century.
It is also less important. What remains important is the history of Greek
civilization and the shape of this, paradoxically, was determined by a
kingdom in northern Greece which some said was not Greek at all:
Macedon. In the second half of the fourth century it created an empire bigger
than any yet seen, the legatee of both Persia and the city-states. It organized
the world we call Hellenistic because of the preponderance and uniting force
within it of a culture, Greek in inspiration and language. Yet Macedon was a
barbarous place, perhaps centuries behind Athens in the quality of its life and
culture.
The story begins with the decline of Persian power. Persian recovery in
alliance with Sparta had masked important internal weaknesses. One of them
is commemorated by a famous book, the Anabasis of Xenophon, the story of
the long march of an army of Greek mercenaries back up the Tigris and
across the mountains to the Black Sea after an unsuccessful attempt on the
Persian throne by a brother of the king. This was only a minor and
subsidiary episode in the important story of Persian decline, an offshoot of
one particular crisis of internal division. Throughout the fourth century that
empire’s troubles continued, with province after province (among them
Egypt which won its independence as early as 404 and held it for sixty
years) slipping out of control. A major revolt by the western satraps took a
long time to master and though in the end imperial rule was restored the cost
had been great. When at last reimposed, Persian rule was often weak.
One ruler tempted by the possibilities of this decline was Philip II of
Macedon, a not very highly regarded northern kingdom whose power rested
on a warrior aristocracy; it was a rough, tough society, its rulers still
somewhat like the warlords of Homeric times, their power resting more on
personal ascendancy than institutions. Whether this was a state which was a
part of the world of the Hellenes was disputed; some Greeks thought
Macedonians barbarians. On the other hand, their kings claimed descent

from Greek houses (one going back to Heracles) and their claim was
generally recognized. Philip himself sought status; he wanted Macedon to be
thought of as Greek. When he became regent of Macedon in 359 BC he
began a steady acquisition of territory at the expense of other Greek states.
His ultimate argument was an army which became by the end of his reign
the best-trained and organized in Greece. The Macedonian military tradition
had emphasized heavy, armoured cavalry, and this continued to be a major
arm. Philip added to this tradition the benefit of lessons about infantry he
had drawn while a hostage at Thebes in his youth. From hoplite tactics he
evolved a new weapon, the sixteen-deep phalanx of pikemen. The men in its
ranks carried pikes twice as long as a hoplite spear and they operated in a
more open formation, pike shafts from the second and third ranks running
between men in the front to present a much denser array of weapons for the
charge. Another advantage of the Macedonians was a grasp of siege-warfare
techniques not shown by other Greek armies; they had catapults which made
it possible to force a besieged town’s defenders to take cover while
battering-rams, mobile towers and mounds of earth were brought into play.
Such things had previously been seen only in the armies of Assyria and their
Asian successors. Finally, Philip ruled a fairly wealthy state, its riches much
increased once he had acquired the gold-mines of Mount Pangaeum, though
he spent so much that he left huge debts.
He used his power first to ensure the effective unification of Macedon
itself. Within a few years the infant for whom he was regent was deposed
and Philip was elected king. Then he began to look to the south and north-
east. In these areas expansion sooner or later meant encroachment upon the
interests and position of Athens. Her allies in Rhodes, Cos, Chios and
Byzantium placed themselves under Macedonian patronage. Another,
Phocis, went down in a war in which Athens had egged her on but failed to
give effective support. Although Demosthenes, the last great agitator of
Athenian democracy, made himself a place in history (still recalled by the
word ‘philippic’) by warning his countrymen of the dangers they faced, he
could not save them. When the war between Athens and Macedon (355–346
BC) at last ended, Philip had won not only Thessaly, but had established
himself in central Greece and controlled the pass of Thermopylae.
His situation favoured designs on Thrace and this implied a return of
Greek interest towards Persia. One Athenian writer advocated a Hellenic
crusade to exploit Persia’s weakness (in opposition to Demosthenes who

continued to denounce the Macedonian ‘barbarian’), and once more plans
were made to liberate the Asian cities, a notion attractive enough to bear fruit
in a reluctant League of Corinth formed by the major Greek states other than
Sparta in 337 BC. Philip was its president and general and it was somewhat
reminiscent of the Delian League; the apparent independence of its members
was a sham, for they were Macedonian satellites. Though the culmination of
Philip’s work and reign (he was assassinated the following year), it had only
come into being after Macedon had defeated the Athenians and Thebans
again in 338 BC. The terms of peace imposed by Philip were not harsh, but
the League had to agree to go to war with Persia under Macedonian
leadership. There was one more kick of Greek independence after Philip’s
death, but his son and successor Alexander crushed the Greek rebels as he
did others in other parts of his kingdom. Thebes was then razed to the
ground and its population enslaved (335 BC).
This was the real end of four centuries of Greek history. During this
period civilization had been created and sheltered by the city-state, one of
the most successful political forms the world has ever known. Now, not for
the first time nor the last, the future seemed to belong to the bigger
battalions, the bigger organizations. Mainland Greece was from this time a
political backwater under Macedonian governors and garrisons. Like his
father, Alexander sought to conciliate the Greeks by giving them a large
measure of internal self-government in return for adherence to his foreign
policy. This was always to leave some Greeks, notably the Athenian
democrats, unreconciled. When Alexander died, Athens once more tried to
organize an anti-Macedonian coalition. The results were disastrous. A part of
the price of defeat was the replacement of democracy by oligarchy at Athens
(322 BC); Demosthenes fled to an island off the coast, seeking sanctuary in
the temple of Poseidon there, but poisoned himself when the Macedonians
came for him. A Macedonian governor henceforth ruled the Peloponnese.
Alexander’s reign had thus begun with difficulties, but once they were
surmounted, he could turn his attention to Persia. In 334 BC he crossed to
Asia at the head of an army of which a quarter was drawn from Greece.
There was more than idealism in this; aggressive war might also be prudent,
for the fine army left by Philip had to be paid if it was not to present a threat
to a new king, and conquest would provide the money. He was twenty-two
years old and before him lay a short career of conquest so brilliant that it
would leave his name a myth down the ages and provide a setting for the

widest expansion of Greek culture. He drew the city-states into a still wider
world.
The story is simple to summarize. Legend says that after crossing to Asia
Minor he cut the Gordian Knot. He then defeated the Persians at the battle of
Issus. This was followed by a campaign which swept south through Syria,
destroying Tyre on the way, and eventually to Egypt, where Alexander
founded the city still bearing his name. In every battle he was his own best
soldier and he was wounded several times in the mêlée. He pushed into the
desert, interrogated the oracle at Siwah and then went back into Asia to
inflict a second and decisive defeat on Darius III in 331 BC. Persepolis was
sacked and burnt and Alexander proclaimed successor to the Persian throne;
Darius was murdered by one of his satraps the next year. On went Alexander,
pursuing the Iranians of the north-east into Afghanistan (where Kandahar is
another of the many cities which commemorate his name) and penetrating a
hundred miles or so beyond the Indus into the Punjab. Then he turned back
because his army would go no further. It was tired and having defeated an
army with 200 elephants may have been disinclined to face the further 5000
reported to be waiting for it in the Ganges valley. Alexander returned to
Babylon. There he died in 323 BC, thirty-two years old and just ten years
after he had left Macedon.

Both his conquests and their organization in empire bear the stamp of
individual genius; the word is not too strong, for achievement on this scale is
more than the fruit of good fortune, favourable historical circumstance or
blind determinism. Alexander was a creative mind and something of a
visionary even if self-absorbed and obsessed with his pursuit of glory. With
great intelligence he combined almost reckless courage; he believed his
mother’s ancestor to be Homer’s Achilles and strove to emulate the hero. He
was ambitious as much to prove himself in men’s eyes – or perhaps those of
his forceful and repellent mother – as to win new lands. The idea of the
Hellenic crusade against Persia undoubtedly had reality for him, but he was
also, for all his admiration of the Greek culture of which he had learnt from
his tutor Aristotle, too egocentric to be a missionary, and his
cosmopolitanism was grounded in an appreciation of realities. His empire
had to be run by Persians as well as Macedonians. Alexander himself
married first a Bactrian and then a Persian princess, and accepted –
unfittingly, thought some of his companions – the homage which the East
rendered to rulers it thought to be godlike. He was also at times rash and
impulsive; it was his soldiers who finally made him turn back at the Indus,
and the ruler of Macedon had no business to plunge into battle with no
attention for what would happen to the monarchy if he should die without a
successor. Worse still, he killed a friend in a drunken brawl and he may have
arranged his father’s murder.
Alexander lived too short a time either to ensure the unity of his empire in
the future or to prove to posterity that even he could not have held it together
for long. What he did in this time is indubitably impressive. The foundation
of twenty-five ‘cities’ is by itself a considerable matter, even if some of them
were only spruced-up strongpoints; they were keys to the Asian land routes.
The integration of east and west in their government was still more difficult,
but Alexander took it a long way in ten years. Of course, he had little choice;
there were not enough Greeks and Macedonians to conquer and govern the
huge empire. From the first he ruled through Persian officials in the
conquered areas and after coming back from India he began the
reorganization of the army in mixed regiments of Macedonians and Persians.
His adoption of Persian dress and his attempt to exact prostration – an
obligatory kow-tow like that which so many Europeans in recent times
found degrading when it was asked for by Chinese rulers – from his
compatriots as well as from Persians, also antagonized his followers, for

they revealed his taste for oriental manners. There were plots and mutinies;
they were not successful, and his relatively mild reprisals do not suggest that
the situation was ever very dangerous for Alexander. The crisis was followed
by his most spectacular gesture of cultural integration when, taking Darius’s
daughter as a wife (in addition to his Bactrian princess, Roxana), he then
officiated at the mass wedding of 9000 of his soldiers to eastern women.
This was the famous ‘marriage of East and West’, an act of state rather than
of idealism, for the new empire had to be cemented together if it was to
survive.
What the empire really meant in cultural interplay is more difficult to
assess. There was certainly a wider physical dispersal of Greeks. But the
results of this were only to appear after Alexander’s death, when the formal
framework of empire collapsed and yet the cultural fact of a Hellenistic
world emerged from it. We do not in fact know very much about life in
Alexander’s empire and it must be unlikely, given its brief duration, the
limitations of ancient government and a lack of will to embark upon
fundamental change, that most of its inhabitants found things very different
in 323 BC from what they had known ten years before.
Alexander’s impact was made in the east. He did not reign long enough to
affect the interplay of the western Greeks with Carthage, which was the
main preoccupation of the later fourth century in the west. In Greece itself
things stayed quiet until his death. It was in Asia that he ruled lands no
Greeks had ruled before. In Persia he had proclaimed himself heir to the
Great King and rulers in the northern satrapies of Bithynia, Cappadocia and
Armenia did him homage.
Weak as the cement of the Alexandrine empire must have been, it was
subjected to intolerable strain when he died without a competent heir. His
generals fell to fighting for what they could get and keep, and the empire
was dissolving even before the birth of his posthumous son by Roxana. She
had already murdered his second wife, so when she and her son died in the
troubles any hope of direct descent vanished. In forty-odd years of fighting it
was settled that there would be no reconstitution of Alexander’s empire.
There emerged instead a group of big states, each of them a hereditary
monarchy. They were founded by successful soldiers, the diadochi, or
‘Successors’.
Ptolemy Soter, one of Alexander’s best generals, had at once seized power
in Egypt on his master’s death and to it he subsequently conveyed the

valuable prize of Alexander’s body. Ptolemy’s descendants were to rule the
province for nearly three hundred years until the death of Cleopatra in 30 BC.
Ptolemaic Egypt was the longest-lived and richest of the successor states. Of
the Asian empire, the Indian territories and some of Afghanistan passed out
of Greek hands altogether, being ceded to an Indian ruler in return for
military help. The rest of it was by 300 BC a huge kingdom of one and a half
million square miles and perhaps thirty million subjects, stretching from
Afghanistan to Syria, the site of its capital, Antioch. This vast domain was
ruled by the descendants of Seleucus, another Macedonian general. Attacks
by migrating Celts from northern Europe (who had already invaded
Macedonia itself) led to its partial disruption early in the third century BC
and part of it thenceforth formed the kingdom of Pergamon, ruled by a
dynasty called the Attalids, who pushed the Celts further into Asia Minor.
The Seleucids kept the rest, though they were to lose Bactria in 225 BC,
where descendants of Alexander’s soldiers set up a remarkable Greek
kingdom. Macedon, under another dynasty, the Antigonids, strove to retain a
control of the Greek states contested in the Aegean by the Ptolemaic fleet
and in Asia Minor by the Seleucids. Once again, about 265 BC, Athens made
a bid for independence but failed.
