Strictly speaking, ‘Aryan’ is a linguistic term, like ‘Indo-European’. None
the less, it has customarily and conveniently been used to identify one group
of those peoples whose movements make up so much of the dynamic of
ancient history in other parts of the Old World after 2000 BC. At about the
time when other Indo-Europeans were flowing into Iran, somewhere about
1750 BC, a great influx began to enter India from the Hindu Kush. This was
the beginning of centuries during which waves of these migrants washed
deeper and deeper into the Indus valley and the Punjab and eventually
reached the upper Ganges. They did not obliterate the native peoples, though
the Indus valley civilization crumbled. No doubt much violence marked their
coming, for the Aryans were warriors and nomads, armed with bronze
weapons, bringing horses and chariots, but they settled and there are plenty
of signs that the native populations lived on with them, keeping their own
beliefs and practices alive. There is much archaeological evidence of the
fusion of Harappan with later ways. However qualified, this was an early
example of the assimilation of cultures which was always to characterize
Indian society and was eventually to underlie classical Hinduism’s
remarkable digestive power.
It seems clear that the Aryans brought to India no culture so advanced as
that of the Harappans. It is a little like the story of the coming of Indo-
Europeans in the Aegean. Writing, for example, disappears and does not
emerge again until the middle of the first millennium BC; cities, too, have to
be reinvented and when they are again to be found they lack the elaboration
and order of their Indus valley predecessors. Instead, the Aryans appear
slowly to have given up their pastoral habits and settled into agricultural life,
spreading east and south from their original settlement areas in a sprawl of
villages. This took centuries. Not until the coming of iron was it complete
and the Ganges valley colonized; iron implements made cultivation easier.
Meanwhile, together with this physical opening up of the northern plains, the
invaders had made two decisive contributions to Indian history, in its
religious and in its social institutions.
The Aryans laid the foundations of the religion which has been the heart
of Indian civilization. This centred on sacrificial concepts; through sacrifice
the process of creation which the gods achieved at the beginning of time was
to be endlessly repeated. Agni, the god of fire, was very important, because
it was through his sacrificial flames that men could reach the gods. Great
importance and standing was given to the Brahmans, the priests who

presided over these ceremonies. There was a pantheon of gods of whom two
of the most important were Varuna, god of the heavens, controller of natural
order and the embodiment of justice, and Indra, the warrior god who, year
after year, slew a dragon and thus released again the heavenly waters which
came with the breaking of the monsoon. We learn about them from the Rig-
Veda, a collection of more than a thousand hymns performed during
sacrifice, collected for the first time in about 1000 BC but certainly
accumulated over centuries. It is one of our most important sources for the
history not only of Indian religion but also of Aryan society.
The Rig-Veda seems to reflect an Aryan culture as it has been shaped by
settlement in India and not as it had existed at earlier times or in its original
form. It is, like Homer, the eventual written form of a body of oral tradition,
but quite different in being much less difficult to use as a historical source,
since its status is much more certain. Its sanctity made its memorization in
exact form essential, and though the Rig-Veda was not to be written down
until after AD 1300, it was then almost certainly largely uncorrupted from its
original form. Together with later Vedic hymns and prose works, it is our
best source for Aryan India, whose archaeology is cramped for a long time
because building materials less durable than the brick of the Indus valley
cities were used in its towns and temples.
There is a suggestion again of the world of Homer in the world revealed
by the Rig-Veda, which is one of Bronze Age barbarians. Some
archaeologists now believe they can identify in the hymns references to the
destruction of the Harappan cities. Iron is not mentioned and appears only to
have come to India after 1000 BC (there is argument about how late and from
what source). The setting of the hymns is a land which stretches from the
western banks of the Indus to the Ganges, inhabited by Aryan peoples and
dark-skinned native inhabitants. These formed societies whose fundamental
units were families and tribes. What these left behind, though, was less
enduring than the pattern of Aryan social organization which gradually
emerged, to which the Portuguese later gave the name we use, ‘caste’.
About the early history of this vast and complicated subject and its
implications it is impossible to speak with assurance. Once the rules of caste
were written down, they appeared as a hard and solid structure, incapable of
variation. Yet this did not happen until caste had been in existence for
hundreds of years, during which it was still flexible and evolving. Its root
appears to be a recognition of the fundamental class divisions of a settled

agricultural society, a warrior-aristocracy (Kshatriyas), priestly brahmans
and the ordinary peasant-farmers (vaishyas). These are the earliest divisions
of Aryan society which can be observed and seem not to have been
exclusive; movement between them was possible. The only unleapable
barrier in early times seems to have been that between non-Aryans and
Aryans; one of the words used to denote the aboriginal inhabitants of India
by Aryans was dasa, which came eventually to denote ‘slave’. To the
occupational categories was soon added a fourth category for non-Aryans.
Clearly it rested on a wish to preserve racial integrity. These were the
shudras, or ‘unclean’, who might not study or hear the Vedic hymns.
This structure has been elaborated almost ever since. Further divisions and
sub-divisions appeared as society became more complex and movements
within the original threefold structure took place. In this the Brahmans, the
highest class, played a crucial role. Landowners and merchants came to be
distinguished from farmers; the first were called vaishyas, and shudras
became cultivators. Marriage and eating taboos were codified. This process
gradually led to the appearance of the caste system as we know it. A vast
number of castes and sub-castes slowly inserted themselves into the system.
Their obligations and demands eventually became a primary regulator of
Indian society, perhaps the only significant one in many Indians’ lives. By
modern times there were thousands of jatis– local castes with members
restricted to marrying within them, eating only food cooked by fellow
members, and obeying their regulations. Usually, too, a caste limited those
who belonged to it to the practice of one craft or profession. For this reason
(as well as because of the traditional ties of tribe, family and locality and the
distribution of wealth) the structure of power in Indian society right down to
the present day has had much more to it than formal political institutions and
central authority.
In early times Aryan tribal society threw up kings, who emerged, no
doubt, because of military skill. Gradually, some of them acquired
something like divine sanction, though this must always have depended on a
nice balance of relations with the Brahman caste. But this was not the only
political pattern. Not all Aryans accepted this evolution. By about 600 BC,
when some of the detail of early Indian political history at last begins to be
dimly discernible through a mass of legend and myth, two sorts of political
communities can be discerned, one non-monarchical, tending to survive in
the hilly north, and one monarchical, established in the Ganges valley. This

reflected centuries of steady pressure by the Aryans towards the east and
south, during which peaceful settlement and intermarriage seem to have
played as big a part as conquest. Gradually, during this era, the centre of
gravity of Aryan India had shifted from the Punjab to the Ganges valley as
Aryan culture was adopted by the peoples already there.
As we emerge from the twilight zone of the Vedic kingdoms, it is clear
that they established something like a cultural unity in northern India. The
Ganges valley was by the seventh century BC the great centre of Indian
population. It may be that the cultivation of rice made this possible. A
second age of Indian cities began there, the first of them market-places and
centres of manufacture, to judge by the way they brought together
specialized craftsmen. The great plains, together with the development of
armies on a larger and better-equipped scale (we hear of the use of
elephants), favoured the consolidation of larger political units. At the end of
the seventh century BC, northern India was organized in sixteen kingdoms,
though how this happened and how they were related to one another is still
hard to disentangle from their mythology. None the less, the existence of
coinage and the beginnings of writing make it likely that they had
governments of growing solidity and regularity.
The processes in which they emerged are touched on in some of the
earliest literary sources for Indian history, the Brahmanas texts composed
during the period when Aryan culture came to dominate the Ganges valley
(c.800–600 BC). But more about them and the great names involved can be
found in later documents, above all in two great Indian epics, the Ramayana
and the Mahabharata. The present texts are the result of constant revision
from about 400 BC to AD 400, when they were written down as we know
them for the first time, so their interpretation is not easy. In consequence, it
remains hard to get at the political and administrative reality behind, say, the
kingdom of Magadha, based on southern Bihar, which emerged eventually as
the preponderant power and was to be the core of the first historical empires
of India. On the other hand (and possibly more importantly), the evidence is
clear that the Ganges valley was already what it was to remain, the seat of
empire, its cultural domination assured as the centre of Indian civilization,
the future Hindustan.
The later Vedic texts and the general richness of the Aryan literary record
make it all too easy to forget the existence of half the sub-continent. Written
evidence tends to confine Indian history down to this point (and even after)

to the history of the north. The state of archaeological and historical
scholarship also reflects and further explains the concentration of attention
on northern India. There is just much more known about it in ancient times
than about the south. But there are also better and less accidental
justifications for such an emphasis. The archaeological evidence shows, for
example, a clear and continuing cultural lag in this early period between the
area of the Indus system and the rest of India (to which, it may be remarked,
the river was to give its name). Enlightenment (if it may be so expressed)
came from the north. In the south, near modern Mysore, settlements roughly
contemporaneous with Harappa show no trace of metal, though there is
evidence of domesticated cattle and goats. Bronze and copper only begin to
appear at some time after the Aryan arrival in the north. Once outside the
Indus system, too, there are no contemporary metal sculptures, no seals and
fewer terracotta figures. In Kashmir and eastern Bengal there are strong
evidences of Stone Age cultures with affinities with those of south China,
but it is at least clear that, whatever the local characteristics of the Indian
cultures with which they were in contact and within the limits imposed by
geography, first Harappan and then Aryan civilization were dominant. They
gradually asserted themselves towards Bengal and the Ganges valley, down
the west coast towards Gujarat, and in the central highlands of the sub-
continent. This is the pattern of the Dark Age, and when we reach that of
history, there is not much additional light. The survival of Dravidian
languages in the south shows the region’s persistent isolation.
Topography explains much of it. The Deccan has always been cut off from
the north by jungle-clad mountains, the Vindhya. Internally, too, the south is
broken and hilly, and this did not favour the building of large states as did
the open plains of the north. Instead, south India remained fragmented, some
of its peoples persisting, thanks to their inaccessibility, in the hunting and
gathering cultures of a tribal age. Others, by a different accident of
geography, turned to the seas – another contrast with the predominantly
agrarian empires of the north.
Millions of people must have been affected by the changes so far
described. Estimates of ancient populations are notoriously unreliable.
India’s has been put at about 25 million in 400 BC, which would be roughly a
quarter of the whole population of the world at that time. The importance of
India’s early history nevertheless lies in the way it laid down patterns still
shaping the lives of even larger numbers today, rather than in its impact on

big populations in antiquity. This is above all true of religion. Classical
Hinduism crystallized in the first millennium BC. As it did, India also gave
birth to the first world religion – Buddhism; it was eventually to dominate
wide areas of Asia. What men do is shaped by what they believe they can do;
it is the making of a culture that is the pulse of Indian history, not the making
of a nation or an economy, and to this culture religion was central.
The deepest roots of the Indian religious and philosophical synthesis go
very deep indeed. One of the great popular cult figures of the Hindu
pantheon today is Shiva, in whose worship many early fertility cults have
been brought together. A seal from Mohenjo-Daro already shows a figure
who looks like an early Shiva, and stones like the lingam found in modern
temples, the phallic cult-object which is his emblem, have been found in the
Harappan cities. There is some presumptive evidence therefore for
speculating that the worship of Shiva may be the oldest surviving religious
cult in the world. Though he has assimilated many important Aryan
characteristics, he is pre-Aryan and survives in all his multifaceted power,
still an object of veneration in the twentieth century. Nor is Shiva the only
possible survival from the remote past of Indus civilization. Other Harappan
seals seem to suggest a religious world centred about a mother-goddess and
a bull. The bull survives to this day, the Nandi of countless village shrines all
over Hindu India (and newly vigorous in his twentieth-century incarnation,
as the electoral symbol of the Congress Party).
Vishnu, another focus of modern popular Hindu devotion, is much more
an Aryan. Vishnu joined hundreds of local gods and goddesses still
worshipped today to form the Hindu pantheon. Yet his cult is far from being
either the only or the best evidence of the Aryan contribution to Hinduism.
Whatever survived from the Harappan (or even pre-Harappan) past, the
major philosophical and speculative traditions of Hinduism stem from Vedic
religion. These are the Aryan legacy. To this day, Sanskrit is the language of
religious learning; it transcends ethnic divisions, being used in the
Dravidian-speaking south as much as in the north by the Brahman. It was a
great cultural adhesive and so was the religion it carried. The Vedic hymns
provided the nucleus for a system of religious thought more abstract and
philosophical than primitive animism. Out of Aryan notions of hell and
paradise, the House of Clay and the World of the Fathers, there gradually
evolved the belief that action in life determined human destiny. An immense,
all-embracing structure of thought slowly emerged, a world view in which

all things are linked in a huge web of being. Souls might pass through
different forms in this immense whole; they might move up or down the
scale of being, between castes, for example, or even between the human and
animal worlds. The idea of transmigration from life to life, its forms
determined by behaviour, was linked to the idea of purgation and renewal, to
the trust in liberation from the transitory, accidental and apparent, and to
belief in the eventual indentity of soul and absolute being in Brahma, the
creative principle. The duty of the believer was the observation of Dharma –
a virtually untranslatable concept, but one which embodies something of the
western ideas of a natural law of justice and something of the idea that men
owed respect and obedience to the duties of their station.
These developments took a long time. The steps by which the original
Vedic tradition began its transformation into classical Hinduism are obscure
and complicated. At the centre of the early evolution had been the Brahmans
who long controlled religious thought because of their key role in the
sacrificial rites of Vedic religion. The brahmanical class appears to have used
its religious authority to emphasize its seclusion and privilege. To kill a
Brahman soon became the gravest of crimes; even kings could not contend
with their powers. Yet they seem to have come to terms with the gods of an
older world in early times; it has been suggested that it may have been the
infiltration of the brahmanical class by priests of the non-Aryan cults which
ensured the survival and later popularity of the cult of Shiva.
The sacred Upanishads, texts dating from about 700 BC, mark the next
important evolution towards a more philosophical religion. They are a mixed
bag of about 250 devotional utterances, hymns, aphorisms and reflections of
holy men pointing to the inner meaning of the traditional religious truths.
They give much less emphasis to personal gods and goddesses than earlier
texts and also include some of the earliest ascetic teachings which were to be
so visible and striking a feature of Indian religion, even if only practised by a
small minority. The Upanishads met the need felt by some men to look
outside the traditional structure for religious satisfaction. Doubt appears to
have been felt about the sacrificial principle. New patterns of thought had
begun to appear at the beginning of the historical period and uncertainty
about traditional beliefs is already expressed in the later hymns of the Rig-
Veda. It is convenient to mention such developments here because they
cannot be understood apart from the Aryan and pre-Aryan past. Classical
Hinduism was to embody a synthesis of ideas like those in the Upanishads

(pointing to a monotheistic conception of the universe) with the more
polytheistic popular tradition represented by the Brahmans.
Abstract speculation and asceticism were often favoured by the existence
of monasticism, a stepping-aside from material concerns to practise devotion
and contemplation. The practice appeared in Vedic times. Some monks
threw themselves into ascetic experiment, others pressed speculation very far
and we have records of intellectual systems which rested on outright
determinism and materialism. One very successful cult which did not require
belief in gods and expressed a reaction against the formalism of the
brahmanical religion was Jainism, a creation of a sixth-century teacher who,
among other things, preached a respect for animal life which made
agriculture or animal husbandry impossible. Jains therefore tended to
become merchants, with the result that in modern times the Jain community
is one of the wealthiest in India. But much the most important of the
innovating systems was the teaching of the Buddha, the ‘enlightened one’ or
‘aware one’ as his name may be translated.
It has been thought significant that the Buddha, like some other religious
innovators, was born in one of the states to the northern edge of the Ganges
plain where the orthodox, monarchical pattern emerging elsewhere did not
establish itself. This was early in the sixth century BC. Siddhartha Gautama
was not a Brahman, but a prince of the warrior class. After a comfortable and
gentlemanly upbringing he found his life unsatisfying and left home. His
first recourse was asceticism. Seven years of this proved to him that he was
on the wrong road. He began instead to preach and teach. His reflections led
him to propound an austere and ethical doctrine, whose aim was liberation
from suffering by achieving higher states of consciousness. This was not
without parallels in the teaching of the Upanishads.
An important part in this was to be played by yoga, which was to become
one of what were termed the ‘Six Systems’ of Hindu philosophy. The word
has many meanings but in this context is roughly translatable as ‘method’ or
‘technique’. It sought to achieve truth through meditation after a complete
and perfect control of the body had been attained. Such control was
supposed to reveal the illusion of personality which, like all else in the
created world, is mere flux, the passage of events, not identity. This system,
too, had already been sketched in the Upanishads and was to become one of
the aspects of Indian religion which struck visitors from Europe most
forcibly. The Buddha taught his disciples so to discipline and shed the

demands of the flesh that no obstacle should prevent the soul from attaining
the blessed state of nirvana or self-annihilation, freedom from the endless
cycle of rebirth and transmigration, a doctrine urging men not to do
something, but to be something – in order not to be anything. The way to
achieve this was to follow an eightfold path of moral and spiritual
improvement. All this amounts to a great ethical and humanitarian
revolution.
The Buddha apparently had great practical and organizing ability.
Together with his unquestionable personal quality, it must have helped to
make him a popular and successful teacher. He sidestepped, rather than
opposed, the brahmanical religion and this must have smoothed his path.
The appearance of communities of Buddhist monks gave his work an
institutional form which would outlive him. He also offered a role to those
not satisfied by traditional practice, in particular to women and to low-caste
followers, for caste was irrelevant in his eyes. Finally, Buddhism was non-
ritualistic, simple and atheistic. It soon underwent elaboration and, some
would say, speculative contamination, and like all great religions it
assimilated much pre-existing belief and practice, but by doing so it retained
great popularity.
Yet Buddhism did not supplant brahmanical religion and for two centuries
or so was confined to a relatively small part of the Ganges valley. In the end,
too – though not until well into the Christian era – Hinduism was to be the
victor and Buddhism would dwindle to a minority belief in India. But it was
to become the most widespread religion in Asia and a potent force in world
history. It is the first world religion to spread beyond the society in which it
was born, for the older tradition of Israel had to wait for the Christian era
before it could assume a world role. In its native India, Buddhism was to be
important until the coming of Islam. The teaching of the Buddha marks,
therefore, a recognizable epoch in Indian history; it justifies a break in its
exposition. By his day, an Indian civilization still living today and still
capable of enormous assimilative feats stood complete in its essentials. This
was a huge fact; it would separate India from the rest of the world.
Much of the achievement of early civilization in India remains intangible.
There is a famous figure of a beautiful dancing-girl from Mohenjo-Daro, but
ancient India before the Buddha’s time did not produce great art on the scale
of Mesopotamia, Egypt or Minoan Crete, far less their great monuments.
Marginal in its technology, India came late – though how much later than

other civilizations cannot be exactly said – to literacy, too. Yet the
uncertainties of much of India’s early history cannot obscure the fact that its
social system and religions have lasted longer than any other great creations
of the human mind. Even to guess at what influence they exercised through
the attitudes they encouraged, diffused through centuries in pure or impure
forms, is rash. Only a negative dogmatism is safe; so comprehending a set of
world views, institutions so careless of the individual, philosophy so
assertive of the relentless cycles of being, so lacking in any easy ascription
of responsibility for good and evil, cannot but have made a history very
different from that of men reared in the great Semitic traditions. And these
attitudes were formed and settled for the most part a thousand years before
Christ.
ANCIENT CHINA
The most striking fact of China’s history is that it has gone on for so long.
For about 2500 years there has been a Chinese nation using a Chinese
language. Its government, at least in name, as a single unit has long been
taken to be normal, in spite of periods of grievous division and confusion.
China has had a continuing experience of civilization rivalled in duration
only by that of ancient Egypt and this is the key to Chinese historical
identity. China’s nationhood is as much cultural as political. The example of
India shows how much more important culture can be than government, and
China makes the same point in a different way; there, culture made unified
government easier. Somehow, at a very early date, it crystallized certain
institutions and attitudes which were to endure because they suited its
circumstances. Some of them seem even to transcend the revolution of the
twentieth century.
We must begin with the land itself, and at first sight it does not suggest
much that makes for unity. The physical theatre of Chinese history is vast.
China is bigger than the United States and now contains five times as many
people. The Great Wall which came to guard the northern frontier was in the
end made up of between 2500 and 3000 miles of fortifications and has never
been completely surveyed. From Peking to Hong Kong, more or less due
south, is 1200 miles as the crow flies. This huge expanse contains many
climates and many regions. Above all, northern and southern China are very
different. In summer the north is scorching and arid while the south is humid

and used to floods; the north looks bare and dustblown in the winter, while
the south is always green. One of the major themes of early Chinese history
is of the spread of civilization, sometimes by migration, sometimes by
diffusion, from north to south, of the tendency of conquest and political
unification to take the same broad direction, and of the continual stimulation
and irrigation of northern civilization by currents from the outside, from
Mongolia and Central Asia.
China’s major internal divisions are set by mountains and rivers. Three
great river valleys drain the interior and run across the country roughly from
west to east. They are, from north to south, the Hwang-Ho, or Yellow River,
the Yangtze and the Hsi. It is surprising that a country so vast and thus
divided should form a unity at all. Yet China is isolated, too, a world by itself
since long before the Pleistocene. Much of China is mountainous and except
in the extreme south and north-east her frontiers still sprawl across and along
great ranges and plateaux. The headwaters of the Yangtze, like those of the
Mekong, lie in the high Kunlun, north of Tibet. These highland frontiers are
great insulators. The arc they form is broken only where the Yellow River
flows south into China from inner Mongolia and it is on the banks of this
river that the story of civilization in China begins.
Skirting the Ordos desert, itself separated by another mountain range from
the desolate wastes of the Gobi, the Yellow River opens a sort of funnel into
north China. Through it have flowed people and soil; the loess beds of the
river valley, easily worked and fertile, laid down by wind from the north, are
the basis of the first Chinese agriculture. Once this region was richly
forested and well watered, but it became colder and more desiccated in one
of those climatic transformations which are behind so much primeval social
change. To Chinese prehistory overall, of course, there is a bigger setting
than one river valley. ‘Peking man’, a version of Homo erectus turns up as a
fire-user about 600,000 years ago, and there are Neanderthal traces in all
three of the great river basins. The trail from these forerunners to the dimly
discernible cultures which are their successors in early Neolithic times leads
us to a China already divided into two cultural zones, with a meeting place
and mixing area on the Yellow River. It is impossible to separate the tangle
of cultural interconnections already detectable by that time. But there was no
even progress towards a uniform or united culture; even in early historical
times, we are told, ‘the whole of China… was teeming with Neolithic
survivals’. Against this varied background emerged settled agriculture;

nomads and settlers were to coexist in China until our own day. Rhinoceros
and elephant were still hunted in the north not long before 1000 BC.
As in other parts of the world, the coming of agriculture meant a
revolution. It has been argued that peoples who lived in the semi-tropical
coastal areas of South-East Asia and south China were clearing forests to
make fields as far back as 10,000 BC. Certainly they exploited vegetation to
provide themselves with fibres and food. But this is still a topic about which
much more needs to be known. Rice was being farmed along the Yangtze in
the seventh millennium BC and ground just above the flood level of the
Yellow River begins to yield evidence of agriculture (probably the growing
of millet) from about 5800 BC. Somewhat like that of early Egypt, the first
Chinese agriculture seems to have been exhaustive or semi-exhaustive. The
land was cleared, used for a few years, and then left to revert to nature while
the cultivators turned attention elsewhere. From what has been called the
‘nuclear area of North China’ agriculture can be seen later to spread both
north to Manchuria and to the south. Within it there soon appeared complex
cultures which combined with agriculture the use of jade and wood for
carving, the domestication of silk-worms, the making of ceremonial vessels
in forms which were to become traditional and perhaps even the use of
chopsticks. In other words, this was in Neolithic times already the home of
much that is characteristic of the later Chinese tradition in the historic area.
Ancient writers recognized the importance of this revolutionary social
change and legends identified a specific inventor of agriculture, yet very
little can be inferred confidently or clearly about social organization at this
stage. Perhaps because of this there has been a persistent tendency among
Chinese to idealize it. Long after private property had become widespread it
was assumed that ‘under heaven every spot is the sovereign’s ground’ and
this may reflect early ideas that all land belonged to the community as a
whole. Chinese Marxists later upheld this tradition, discerning in the
archaeological evidence a golden age of primitive Communism preceding a
descent into slave and feudal society. Argument is unlikely to convince those
interested in the question one way or the other. Ground seems to be firmer in
attributing to these times the appearance of a clan structure and totems, with
prohibitions on marriage within the clan. Kinship in this form is almost the
first institution which can be seen to have survived to be important in
historical times. The evidence of the pottery, too, suggests some new
complexity in social roles. Already things were being made which cannot

have been intended for the rough and tumble of everyday use; a stratified
society seems to be emerging before we reach the historical era.
One material sign of a future China already obvious at this stage is the
widespread use of millet, a grain well adapted to the sometimes arid farming
of the north. It was to be the basic staple of Chinese diet until about a
thousand years ago and sustained a society which in due course arrived at
literacy, at a great art of bronze-casting based on a difficult and advanced
technology, at the means of making exquisite pottery far finer than anything
made anywhere else in the world and, above all, at an ordered political and
social system which identifies the first major age of Chinese history. But it
must be remembered once more that the agriculture which made this
possible was for a long time confined to north China and that many parts of
this huge country only took up farming when historical times had already
begun.
The narrative of early times is very hard to recover, but can be outlined
with some confidence. It has been agreed that the story of civilization in
China begins under rulers from a people called the Shang, the first name
with independent evidence to support it in the traditional list of dynasties
which was for a long time the basis of Chinese chronology. From the late
eighth century BC we have better dates, but we still have no chronology for
early Chinese history as well founded as, say, that of Egypt. It is more
certain that somewhere about 1700 BC (and a century each way is an
acceptable margin of approximation) a tribe called the Shang, which enjoyed
the military advantage of the chariot, imposed itself on its neighbours over a
sizeable stretch of the Yellow River valley. Eventually, the Shang domain
was a matter of about 40,000 square miles in northern Honan: this made it
somewhat smaller than modern England, though its cultural influences
reached far beyond its periphery, as evidence from as far away as south
China, Chinese Turkestan and the north-eastern coast shows.
Shang kings lived and died in some state; slaves and human sacrificial
victims were buried with them in deep and lavish tombs. Their courts had
archivists and scribes, for this was the first truly literate culture east of
Mesopotamia. This is one reason for distinguishing between Shang
civilization and Shang dynastic paramountcy; this people showed a cultural
influence which certainly extended far beyond any area they could have
dominated politically. The political arrangements of the Shang domains
themselves seem to have depended on the uniting of landholding with

obligations to a king; the warrior landlords who were the key figures were
the leading members of aristocratic lineages with semi-mythical origins. Yet
Shang government was advanced enough to use scribes and had a
standardized currency. What it could do when at full stretch is shown in its
ability to mobilize large amounts of labour for the building of fortifications
and cities.

Shang China succumbed in the end to another tribe from the west of the
valley, the Chou. A probable date is between 1150 and 1120 BC. Under the
Chou, many of the already elaborate governmental and social structures
inherited from the Shang were preserved and further refined. Burial rites,
bronze-working techniques and decorative art also survived in hardly altered
forms. The great work of the Chou period was the consolidation and
diffusion of this heritage. In it can be discerned the hardening of the
institutions of a future Imperial China which would last 2000 years.
The Chou thought of themselves as surrounded by barbarian peoples,
waiting for the benevolent effects of Chou tranquillization (an idea, it may
be remarked, which still underlay the persistent refusal of Chinese officials
2000 years later to regard diplomatic missions from Europe as anything but
respectful bearers of tribute). Chou supremacy in fact rested on war, but
from it flowed great cultural consequences. As under the Shang, there was
no truly unitary state and Chou government represented a change of degree
rather than kind. It was usually a matter of a group of notables and vassals,
some more dependent on the dynasty than others, offering in good times at
least a formal acknowledgement of its supremacy and all increasingly
sharing in a common culture. Political China (if it is reasonable to use such a
term) rested upon big estates which had sufficient cohesion to have powers
of long survival and in this process their original lords turned into rulers who
could be called kings, served by elementary bureaucracies.
This system collapsed from about 700 BC, when a barbarian incursion
drove the Chou from their ancestral centre to a new home further east, in
Honan. The dynasty did not end until 256 BC, but the next distinguishable
epoch dates from 403 to 221 BC and is significantly known as the Period of
the Warring States. In it, historical selection by conflict grew fierce. Big fish
ate little fish until one only was left and all the lands of the Chinese were for
the first time ruled by one great empire, the Ch’in, from which the country
was to get its name. This is matter for discussion elsewhere; here it is
enough to register an epoch in Chinese history.
Reading about these events in the traditional Chinese historical accounts
can produce a slight feeling of beating the air, and historians who are not
experts in Chinese studies may be forgiven if they cannot trace over this
period of some 1500 years or so any helpful narrative thread in the dimly
discernible struggles of kings and over-mighty subjects. Indeed, scholars
have not yet provided one. Nevertheless, two basic processes were going on

for most of this time, which were very important for the future and which
give the period some unity, though their detail is elusive. The first of these
was a continuing diffusion of culture outwards from the Yellow River basin.
To begin with, Chinese civilization was a matter of tiny islands in a sea of
barbarism. Yet by 500 BC it was the common possession of scores, perhaps
hundreds, of what have been termed ‘states’ scattered across the north, and it
had also been carried into the Yangtze valley. This had long been a swampy,
heavily forested region, very different from the north and inhabited by far
more primitive peoples. Chou influence – in part thanks to military
expansion – irradiated this area and helped to produce the first major culture
and state of the Yangtze valley, the Ch’u civilization. Although owing much
to the Chou, it had many distinctive linguistic, calligraphic, artistic and
religious traits of its own. By the end of the Period of Warring States we
have reached the point at which the stage of Chinese history is about to be
much enlarged.
The second of these fundamental and continuing processes under both
Shang and Chou was the establishment of landmarks in institutions which
were to survive until modern times. Among them was a fundamental division
of Chinese society into a landowning nobility and the common people. Most
of these were peasants, making up the vast majority of the population and
paying for all that China produced in the way of civilization and state power.
What little we know of their countless lives can be quickly said; even less
can be discovered than about the anonymous masses of toilers at the base of
every other ancient civilization. There is one good physical reason for this:
the life of the Chinese peasant was an alternation between his mud hovel in
the winter and an encampment where he lived during the summer months to
guard and tend his growing crops. Neither has left much trace. For the rest,
he appears sunk in the anonymity of his community (he does not belong to a
clan), tied to the soil, occasionally taken from it to carry out other duties and
to serve his lord in war or hunting. His depressed state is expressed by the
classification of Chinese communist historiography which lumped Shang
and Chou together as ‘Slavery Society’ preceding the ‘Feudal Society’ which
comes next.
Though Chinese society was to grow much more complex by the end of
the Warring States Period, this distinction of common people from the nobly
born remained. There were important practical consequences: the nobility,
for example, were not subject to punishments – such as mutilation – inflicted

on the commoner; it was a survival of this in later times that the gentry were
exempt from the beatings which might be visited on the commoner (though,
of course, they might suffer appropriate and even dire punishment for very
serious crimes). The nobility long enjoyed a virtual monopoly of wealth, too,
which outlasted its earlier monopoly of metal weapons. None the less, these
were not the crucial distinctions of status, which lay elsewhere, in the
nobleman’s special religious standing through a monopoly of certain ritual
practices. Only noblemen could share in the cults which were the heart of the
Chinese notion of kinship. Only the nobleman belonged to a family – which
meant that he had ancestors. Reverence for ancestors and propitiation of
their spirits had existed before the Shang, though it does not seem that in
early times many ancestors were thought likely to survive into the spirit
world. Possibly the only ones lucky enough to do so would be the spirits of
particularly important persons; the most likely, of course, were the rulers
themselves, whose ultimate origin, it was claimed, was itself godly.
The family emerged as a legal refinement and sub-division of the clan,
and the Chou period was the most important one in its clarification. There
were about a hundred clans, within each of which marriage was forbidden.
Each was supposed to be founded by a hero or a god. The patriarchal heads
of the clan’s families and houses exercised special authority over its
members and were all qualified to carry out its rituals and thus influence
spirits to act as intermediaries with the powers which controlled the universe
on the clan’s behalf. These practices came to identify persons entitled to
possess land or hold office. The clan offered a sort of democracy of
opportunity at this level: any of its members could be appointed to the
highest place in it, for they were all qualified by the essential virtue of a
descent whose origins were godlike. In this sense, a king was only primus
inter pares, a patrician outstanding among all patricians.
The family absorbed enormous quantities of religious feeling and psychic
energy; its rituals were exacting and time-consuming. The common people,
not sharing in this, found a religious outlet in maintaining the worship of
nature gods. These always got some attention from the élite, too, the worship
of mountains and rivers and the propitiating of their spirits being an
important imperial duty from early times, but they were to influence the
central developments of Chinese thought less than similar notions in other
religions.

Religion had considerable repercussions on political forms. The heart of
the ruling house’s claim to obedience was its religious superiority. Through
the maintenance of ritual, it had access to the goodwill of unseen powers,
whose intentions might be known from the oracles. When these had been
interpreted, the ordering of the agricultural life of the community was
possible, for they regulated such matters as the time of sowing or harvesting.
Much turned, therefore, on the religious standing of the king; it was of the
first importance to the state. This was reflected in the fact that the Chou
displacement of the Shang was religious as well as military. The idea was
introduced that there existed a god superior to the ancestral god of the
dynasty and that from him there was derived a mandate to rule. Now, it was
claimed, he had decreed that the mandate should pass to other hands. This
was the introduction of another idea fundamental to the Chinese conception
of government and it was to be closely linked to the notion of a cyclic
history, marked by the repeated rise and fall of dynasties. Inevitably, it
provoked speculation about what might be the signs by which the recipient
of the new mandate should be recognized. Filial piety was one, and to this
extent, a conservative principle was implicit. But the Chou writers also
introduced an idea rendered not very comfortably into English by the word
‘virtue’. Clearly, its content remained fluid; disagreement and discussion
were therefore possible.
In its earliest forms the Chinese ‘state’ – and one must think over long
periods of more than one authority coexisting – seems little more than an
abstraction from the idea of the ruler’s estate and the necessity to maintain
the rituals and sacrifices. The records do not leave an impression of a very
busy monarchy. Apart from the extraordinary decisions of peace or war, the
king seems to have had little to do except fulfil his religious duties, hunt, and
initiate building projects in the palace complexes which appear as early as
Shang times, though there are indications of Chou kings also undertaking
(with the labour of prisoners) extensive agricultural colonization. For a long
time the early Chinese rulers did without any very considerable bureaucracy.
Gradually a hierarchy of ministers emerged who regulated court life, but the
king was a landowner who for the most part needed only bailiffs, overseers
and a few scribes. No doubt much of his life was spent on the move about
his lands. The only other aspect of his activity which needed expert support
was the supernatural. Out of this much was to grow, not least the intimate
connection between rule in China and the determination of time and the

calendar, both very important in agricultural societies. These were based on
astronomy, and though this came to have a respectable basis in observation
and calculation, its origins were magical and religious.
In Shang times all the great decisions of state, and many lesser ones, were
taken by consulting oracles. This was done by engraving turtle shells or the
shoulder-blades of certain animals with written characters and then applying
to them a heated bronze pin so as to produce cracks on the reverse side. The
direction and length of these cracks in relation to the characters would then
be considered and the oracle read accordingly by the king. This was an
enormously important practice from the point of view of historians, for such
oracles were kept, presumably as records. They provide us with evidence for
the foundation of Chinese language, as the characters on the oracle bones
(and some early bronzes) are basically those of classical Chinese. The Shang
had about 5000 such characters, though not all can be read. Nevertheless, the
principles of this writing show a unique consistency; while other
civilizations gave up pictographic characterization in favour of phonetic
systems, the Chinese language grew and evolved, but remained essentially
within the pictographic framework. Already under the Shang, moreover, the
structure of the language was that of modern Chinese – monosyllabic and
depending on word order, not on the inflection of words, to convey meaning.
The Shang, in fact, already used a form of Chinese.
Writing was to remain high on the scale of Chinese arts and has always
retained some trace of the religious respect given to the first characters. Only
a few years ago, examples of Mao Zedong’s calligraphy were widely
reproduced and were used to enhance his prestige during his ascendancy.
This reflects the centuries during which writing remained the jealously
guarded privilege of the élite. The readers of the oracles, the so-called shih,
were the forerunners of the later scholar-gentry class; they were
indispensable experts, the possessors of hieratic and arcane skills. Their
monopoly was to pass to the much larger class of the scholar-gentry in later
times. The language thus remained the form of communication of a
relatively small élite, which not only found its privileges rooted in its
possession but also had an interest in preserving it against corruption or
variation. It was of enormous importance as a unifying and stabilizing force
because written Chinese became a language of government and culture
transcending divisions of dialect, religion and region. Its use by the élite tied
the country together.

Several great determinants of future Chinese history had thus been settled
in outline by the end of the Chou period. That end came after increasing
signs of social changes which were affecting the operation of the major
institutions. This is not surprising; China long remained basically
agricultural, and change was often initiated by the pressure of population
upon resources. This accounts for the impact of the introduction of iron,
probably in use by about 500 BC. As elsewhere a sharp rise in agricultural
production (and therefore in population) followed. The first tools which have
been found come from the fifth century BC; iron weapons came later. At an
early date, too, tools were made by casting, as iron moulds for sickle blades
have been found dating from the fourth or fifth century. Chinese technique in
handling the new metal was thus advanced in very early times. Whether by
development from bronze casting or by experiments with pottery furnaces,
which could produce high temperatures, China somehow arrived at the
casting of iron at about the same time as knowledge of how to forge it. Exact
precedence is unimportant; what is noteworthy is that sufficiently high
temperatures for casting were not available elsewhere for another nineteen
centuries or so.
Another important change under the later Chou was a great growth of
cities. They tended to be sited on plains near rivers, but the first of them had
probably taken their shape and location from the use of landowners’ temples
as centres of administration for their estates. This drew to them other
temples, those of the popular nature gods, as communities collected about
them. Then, under the Shang, a new scale of government begins to make
itself felt; we find stamped-earth ramparts, specialized aristocratic and court
quarters and the remains of large buildings. At Anyang, a Shang capital in
about 1300 BC, there were metal foundries and potters’ kilns as well as
palaces and a royal graveyard. By late Chou times, the capital Wang Ch’eng
is surrounded by a rectangle of earth walls each nearly three kilometres long.
There were scores of cities by 500 BC and their prevalence implies an
increasingly varied society. Many of them had three well-defined areas: a
small enclosure where the aristocracy lived, a larger one inhabited by
specialized craftsmen and merchants, and the fields outside the walls which
fed the city. A merchant class was another important development. It may
not have been much regarded by the landowners but well before 1000 BC a
cowry shell currency was used which shows a new complexity of economic
life and the presence of specialists in trade. Their quarters and those of the

craftsmen were distinguished from those of the nobility by walls and
ramparts around the latter, but they, too, fell within the walls of the city – a
sign of a growing need for defence. In the commercial streets of cities of the
Warring States Period could be found shops selling jewellery, curios, food
and clothing, as well as taverns, gambling houses and brothels.
The heart of Chinese society, none the less, still beat to the slow rhythms
of the countryside. The privileged class which presided over the land system
showed unmistakable signs of a growing independence of its kings as the
Chou period came to an end. Landowners originally had the responsibility of
providing soldiers to the king and development in the art of war helped to
increase their independence. The nobleman had always had a monopoly of
arms; this was already significant when, in Shang times, Chinese weaponry
was limited for the most part to the bow and the bronze halberd. As time
passed only noblemen could afford the more expensive weapons, armour
and horses which increasingly came into use. The warrior using a chariot as
a platform for archery, before descending to fight the last stage of the battle
on foot with bronze weapons, evolved in the last centuries of the pre-
Christian era into a member of a team of two or three armoured warriors,
moving with a company of sixty or seventy attendants and supporters,
accompanied by a battle-wagon carrying the heavy armour and new weapons
like the cross-bow and long iron sword, which were needed at the scene of
action. The nobleman remained the key figure under this system as in earlier
times.
As historical records become clearer, it can be seen that economic
supremacy was rooted in customary tenure which was very potent and far
reaching. Ownership of estates – theoretically all granted by the king –
extended not only to land but to carts, livestock, implements and, above all,
people. Labourers could be sold, exchanged, or left by will. This was another
basis of a growing independence for the nobility, as well as giving fresh
importance to distinctions within the landowning class. In principle, estates
were held by them in concentric circles about the king’s own demesne,
according to their closeness to the royal line and, therefore, according to the
degree of closeness of their relations with the spirit world. By about 600 BC,
it seems clear that this had effectively reduced the king to dependence on the
greatest princes. There appear a succession of protectors of the royal house;
kings could only resist the encroachments of these oriental Bolingbrokes and
Warwicks in so far as the success of any one of them inevitably provoked the

jealousy of others, and because of the kingly religious prestige which still
counted for much with the lesser nobility. The whole late Chou period was
marked by grave disorder and growing scepticism, though, about the criteria
by which the right to rule was recognizable. The price of survival for the
princes who disputed China was the elaboration of more effective
governments and armed forces, and often they welcomed innovators
prepared to set aside tradition.
In the profound and prolonged social and political crisis of the last
decaying centuries of the Chou and the Period of Warring States (433–221
BC), there was a burst of speculation about the foundations of government
and ethics. The era was to remain famous as the time of the ‘Hundred
Schools’, when wandering scholars moved about from patron to patron,
expounding their teachings. One sign of this new development was the
appearance of a school of writers known as the ‘Legalists’. They are said to
have urged that law-making power should replace ritual observances as the
principle of organization of the state; there should be one law for all,
ordained and vigorously applied by one ruler. The aim of this was the
creation of a wealthy and powerful state. This seemed to many of their
opponents to be little more than a cynical doctrine of power, but the
Legalists were to have important successes in the next few centuries because
kings, at least, liked their ideas. The debate went on for a long time. In this
debate the main opponents of the Legalists were the followers of the teacher
who is the most famous of all Chinese thinkers – Confucius. It is convenient
to call him by that name, though it is only a latinized version of his Chinese
name, K’ung-fu-tzu, and was given to him by Europeans in the seventeenth
century, more than 2000 years after his birth in the middle of the sixth
century BC. He was to be more profoundly respected in China than any other
philosopher. What he said – or was said to have said – shaped his
countrymen’s thinking for 2000 years and was to be paid the compliment of
bitter attack by the first post-Confucian Chinese state, the Marxist republic
of the twentieth century.
Confucius came from a shih family. He was a member of the lesser
nobility who may have spent some time as a minister of state and an
overseer of granaries but probably never rose above a minor official rank.
When he could not find a ruler to put into practice his recommendations for
just government he turned to meditation and teaching; his aim was to present
a purified and more abstract version of the doctrine he believed to lie at the

heart of the traditional practices and thus to revive personal integrity and
disinterested service in the governing class. He was a reforming
conservative, seeking to teach his pupils the essential truths of ancient ways
(Tao) materialized and obscured by routine. Somewhere in the past, he
thought, lay a mythical age when each man knew his place and did his duty;
to return to that was Confucius’s ethical goal. He advocated the principle of
order – the attribution to everything of its correct place in the great gamut of
experience. The practical expression of this was the strong Confucian
predisposition to support the institutions likely to ensure order – the family,
hierarchy, seniority – and due reverence for the many nicely graded
obligations between men.
This was teaching likely to produce men who would respect the traditional
culture, emphasize the value of good form and regular behaviour, and seek
to realize their moral obligations in the scrupulous discharge of duties. It was
immediately successful in that many of Confucius’s pupils won fame and
worldly success (though his teaching deplored the conscious pursuit of such
goals, urging, rather, a gentlemanly self-effacement). But it was also
successful in a much more fundamental sense, since generations of Chinese
civil servants were later to be drilled in the precepts of behaviour and
government which he laid down. ‘Documents, conduct, loyalty and
faithfulness’, four precepts attributed to him as his guidance on government,
helped to form reliable, sometimes disinterested and even humane civil
servants for hundreds of years.
Confucian texts were later to be treated with something like religious awe.
His name gave great prestige to anything with which it was associated. He
was said to have compiled some of the texts later known as the Thirteen
Classics, a collection which only took its final form in the thirteenth century
AD. Rather like the Old Testament, they were a somewhat miscellaneous
collection of old poems, chronicles, some state documents, moral sayings
and an early cosmogony called the Book of Changes, but they were used for
centuries in a unified and creative way to mould generations of China’s civil
servants and rulers in the precepts which were believed to be those approved
by Confucius (the parallel with the use of the Bible, at least in Protestant
countries, is striking here, too). The stamp of authority was set upon this
collection by the tradition that Confucius had selected it and that it must
therefore contain doctrine which digested his teaching. Almost incidentally it
also reinforced still more the use of the Chinese in which these texts were

written as the common language of China’s intellectuals; the collection was
another tie pulling a huge and varied country together in a common culture.
It is striking that Confucius had so little to say about the supernatural. In
the ordinary sense of the word he was not a ‘religious’ teacher (which
probably explains why other teachers had greater success with the masses).
He was essentially concerned with practical duties, an emphasis he shared
with several other Chinese teachers of the fourth and fifth centuries BC.
Possibly because the stamp was then so firmly taken, Chinese thought seems
less troubled by agonized uncertainties over the reality of the actual or the
possibility of personal salvation than other, more tormented, traditions. The
lessons of the past, the wisdom of former times and the maintenance of good
order came to have more importance in it than pondering theological
enigmas or seeking reassurance in the arms of the dark gods.
Yet for all his great influence and his later promotion as the focus of an
official cult, Confucius was not the only maker of Chinese intellectual
tradition. Indeed, the tone of Chinese intellectual life is perhaps not
attributable to any individual’s teaching. It shares something with other
oriental philosophies in its emphasis upon the meditative and reflective
mode rather than the methodical and interrogatory which is more familiar to
Europeans. The mapping of knowledge by systematic questioning of the
mind about the nature and extent of its own powers was not to be a
characteristic activity of Chinese philosophers. This does not mean they
inclined to other-worldliness and fantasy, for Confucianism was
emphatically practical. Unlike the ethical sages of Judaism, Christianity and
Islam, those of China tended always to turn to the here and now, to
pragmatic and secular questions, rather than to theology and metaphysics.
This can also be said of systems rivalling Confucianism which were
evolved to satisfy Chinese needs. One was the teaching of Mo-Tzu, a fifth-
century thinker, who preached an active creed of universal altruism; men
were to love strangers like their own kinsmen. Some of his followers
stressed this side of his teaching, others a religious fervour which
encouraged the worship of spirits and had greater popular appeal. Lao-Tse,
another great teacher (though one whose vast fame obscures the fact that we
know virtually nothing about him), was supposed to be the author of the text
which is the key document of the philosophical system later called Taoism.
This was much more obviously competitive with Confucianism, for it
advocated the positive neglect of much that Confucianism upheld; respect

for the established order, decorum and scrupulous observance of tradition
and ceremonial, for example. Taoism urged submission to a conception
already available in Chinese thought and familiar to Confucius, that of the
Tao or ‘way’, the cosmic principle which runs through and sustains the
harmoniously ordered universe. The practical results of this were likely to be
political quietism and non-attachment; one ideal held up to its practitioners
was that a village should know that other villages existed because it would
hear their cockerels crowing in the mornings, but should have no further
interest in them, no commerce with them and no political order binding them
together. Such an idealization of simplicity and poverty was the very
opposite of the empire and prosperity Confucianism upheld.
All schools of Chinese philosophy had to take account of Confucian
teaching, so great was its prestige and influence. A later sage, the fourth-
century Mencius (a latinization of Meng-tzu), taught men to seek the welfare
of mankind in following Confucian teaching. The following of a moral code
in this way would assure that Man’s fundamentally beneficent nature would
be able to operate. Moreover, a ruler following Confucian principles would
come to rule all China. Eventually, with Buddhism (which had not reached
China by the end of the Warring States Period) and Taoism, Confucianism
was habitually to be referred to as one of the ‘three teachings’ which were
the basis of Chinese culture.
The total effect of such views is imponderable, but probably enormous. It
is hard to say how many people were directly affected by such doctrines and,
in the case of Confucianism its great period of influence lay still in the
remote future at the time of Confucius’s death. Yet Confucianism’s
importance for the directing élites of China was to be immense. It set
standards and ideals for China’s leaders and rulers whose eradication was to
prove impossible even in our own day. Moreover, some of its precepts –
filial piety, for example – filtered down to popular culture through stories
and the traditional motifs of art. It thus further solidified a civilization many
of whose most striking features were well entrenched by the third century
BC. Certainly its teachings accentuated the preoccupation with the past
among China’s rulers which was to give a characteristic bias to Chinese
historiography, and it may also have had a damaging effect on scientific
enquiry. Evidence suggests that after the fifth century BC a tradition of
astronomical observation which had permitted the prediction of lunar

eclipses fell into decline. Some scholars have seen the influence of
Confucianism as part of the explanation of this.
China’s great schools of ethics are one striking example of the way in
which almost all the categories of her civilization differ from those of our
own tradition and, indeed, from those of any other civilization of which we
have knowledge. Its uniqueness is not only a sign of its comparative
isolation, but also of its vigour. Both are displayed in its art, which is what
now remains of ancient China that is most immediately appealing and
accessible. Of the architecture of the Shang and Chou, not much survives;
their building was often in wood, and the tombs do not reveal very much.
Excavation of cities, on the other hand, reveals a capacity for massive
construction; the wall of one Chou capital was made of pounded earth thirty
feet high and forty thick.
Smaller objects survive much more plentifully and they reveal a
civilization which even in Shang times is capable of exquisite work, above
all in its ceramics, unsurpassed in the ancient world. A tradition going back
to Neolithic times lay behind them. Pride of place must be given none the
less to the great series of bronzes which begin in early Shang times and
continue thereafter uninterruptedly. The skill of casting sacrificial containers,
pots, wine-jars, weapons, tripods was already at its peak as early as 1600 BC.
And it is argued by some scholars that the ‘lost-wax’ method, which made
new triumphs possible, was also known in the Shang era. Bronze casting
appears so suddenly and at such a high level of achievement that people long
sought to explain it by transmission of the technique from outside. But there
is no evidence for this and the most likely origin of Chinese metallurgy is
from locally evolved techniques in several centres in the late Neolithic.
None of the bronzes reached the outside world in early times, or at least
there has been no discovery of them elsewhere, which can be dated before
the middle of the first millennium BC. Nor are there many discoveries
outside China at earlier dates of the other things to which Chinese artists
turned their attention, the carving of stone or the appallingly hard jade, for
example, into beautiful and intricate designs. Apart from what she absorbed
from her barbaric nomadic neighbours China not only had little to learn from
the outside until well into the historical era, it seems, but had no reason to
think that the outside world – if she knew of it – wanted to learn much from
her.

6
The Other Worlds of the Ancient Past
So far in this account huge areas of the world have still hardly been
mentioned. Though Africa has priority in the story of the evolution and
spread of humanity, and though the entry of men to the Americas and
Australasia calls for remark, once those remote events have been touched
upon, the beginnings of history focus attention elsewhere. The homes of the
creative cultures which have dominated the story of civilization were the
Near East and Aegean, India and China. In all these areas some meaningful
break in rhythm can be seen somewhere in the first millennium BC; there are
no neat divisions, but there is a certain rough synchrony which makes it
reasonable to divide their histories in this era. But for the great areas of
which nothing has so far been said, such a chronology would be wholly
unrevealing.
This is, in the main, because none of them had achieved levels of
civilization comparable to those already reached in the Mediterranean and
Asia by 1000 BC. Remarkable things had been done by then in western
Europe and the Americas, but when they are given due weight there still
remains a qualitative gap between the complexity and resources of the
societies which produced them and those of the ancient civilizations which
were to found durable traditions. The interest in the ancient history of these
areas lies rather in the way they illustrate that varied roads might lead
towards civilization and that different responses might be demanded by
different environmental challenges than in what they left as their heritage. In
one or two instances they may allow us to reopen arguments about what
constitutes ‘civilization’, but for the period of which we have so far spoken
the story of Africa, of the Pacific peoples, of the Americas and western
Europe is not history but still prehistory. There is little or no correspondence
between its rhythms and what was going on in the Near East or Asia, even
when there were (as in the case of Africa and Europe though not of the
Americas) contacts with them.

Africa is a good place to start, because that is where the human story first
began. Historians of Africa, sensitive to any slighting or imagined slighting
of their subject, like to dwell upon Africa’s importance in prehistory. As
things earlier in this book have shown, they are quite right to do so; most of
the evidence for the life of the earliest hominids is African, they spread from
it into Eurasia and beyond, and the first humans in due course followed
them. Then, though, in the Upper Palaeolithic and the Neolithic the focus
moves elsewhere. Much was still to happen in Africa but the period of its
greatest influence on the rest of the world is long over.

Why this is so we cannot say, but one primary force may well have been a
change of climate. Even recently, say in about 3000 BC, the Sahara supported
animals such as elephants and hippopotami, which have long since
disappeared there; more remarkably, it was the home of pastoral peoples
herding cattle, sheep and goats. Today, the Sahara is the fastest-growing
desert in the world. But what is now desert and arid canyon was once fertile
savannah intersected and drained by rivers running down to the Niger and by
another system 750 miles long, running into Lake Tchad. The peoples who
lived in the hills where these rivers rose have left a record of their life in
rock painting and engraving very different from the earlier cave art of
Europe which depicted little but animal life and only an occasional human.
This record also suggests that the Sahara was then a meeting place of
Negroid and what some have called ‘Europoid’ peoples, those who were,
perhaps, the ancestors of later Berbers and Tuaregs. One of these peoples
seems to have made its way down from Tripoli with horses and chariots and
perhaps to have conquered the pastoralists. Whether they did so or not, their
presence (like that of the Negroid peoples of the Sahara) shows that Africa’s
vegetation was once very different from that of later times: horses need
grazing. Yet when we reach historical times the Sahara is already desiccated,
the sites of a once prosperous people are abandoned, the animals have gone.
Perhaps, therefore, it is climate which drives us back upon Egypt as the
beginning of African history. Yet Egypt exercised little creative influence
beyond the limits of the Nile valley. Though there were contacts with other
cultures, it is not easy to penetrate them. Presumably the Libyans of
Egyptian records were the sort of people who are shown with their chariots
in the Sahara cave-paintings, but we do not certainly know. When the Greek
historian Herodotus came to write about Africa in the fifth century BC, he
found little to say about what went on outside Egypt. His Africa (which he
called Libya) was a land defined by the Nile, which he took to run south,
roughly parallel to the Red Sea, and then to swing westwards. South of the
Nile there lay for him in the east the Ethiopians, in the west a land of deserts,
without inhabitants. He could obtain no information about it, though a
travellers’ tale spoke of a dwarfish people who were sorcerers. Given his
sources, this was topographically by no means an unintelligent construction,
but Herodotus had grasped only a small part of the ethnic truth. The
Ethiopians, like the old inhabitants of upper Egypt, were members of the
Hamitic peoples who make up one of three racial groups in Africa at the end

of the Stone Age later distinguished by anthropologists. The other two were
the ancestors of the modern Bushmen (now sometimes called the ‘San’
people), inhabiting, roughly, the open areas running from the Sahara south to
the Cape, and the Negroid group, eventually dominant in the central forests
and West Africa. (Opinion is divided about the origin and distinctiveness of a
fourth group, the Pygmies.) To judge by the stone tools, cultures associated
with Hamitic or proto-Hamitic peoples seem to have been the most advanced
in Africa before the coming of farming. This was, except in Egypt, a slow
evolution and in Africa the hunting and gathering cultures of prehistory have
coexisted with agriculture right down to modern times.
The same growth which occurred elsewhere when food began to be
produced in quantity soon changed African population patterns, first by
permitting the dense settlements of the Nile valley, which were the
preliminary to Egyptian civilization, then by building up the Negroid
population south of the Sahara, along the grasslands separating desert and
equatorial forest in the second and first millennia BC. This seems to reflect a
spread of agriculture southwards from the north. It also reflects the discovery
of nutritious crops better suited to tropical conditions and other soils than the
wheat and barley which flourished in the Nile valley. These were the millets
and rice of the savannahs. The forest areas could not be exploited until the
coming of other plants suitable to them from South-East Asia and eventually
America. None of this happened before the birth of Christ. Thus was
established one of the major characteristics of African history, a divergence
of cultural trends within the continent.
By that time, iron had come to Africa and it had already produced the first
exploitation of African ores. This occurred in the first independent African
state other than Egypt of which we have information, the kingdom of Kush,
high up the Nile, in the region of Khartoum. This had originally been the
extreme frontier zone of Egyptian activity. After Nubia had been absorbed,
the Sudanese principality which existed to its south was garrisoned by the
Egyptians, but in about 1000 BC it emerged as an independent kingdom,
showing itself deeply marked by Egyptian civilization. Probably its
inhabitants were Hamitic people and its capital was at Napata, just below the
Fourth Cataract. By 730 BC Kush was strong enough to conquer Egypt and
five of its kings ruled as the pharaohs known to history as the Twenty-Fifth
or ‘Ethiopian’ Dynasty. None the less, they could not arrest the Egyptian
decline. When the Assyrians fell on Egypt, the Kushite dynasty ended.

Though Egyptian civilization continued in the kingdom of Kush, a pharaoh
of the next dynasty invaded it in the early sixth century BC. After this, the
Kushites, too, began to push their frontiers further to the south and in so
doing their kingdom underwent two important changes. It became more
Negroid, its language and literature reflecting a weakening of Egyptian
trends, and it extended its reach over new territories which contained both
iron ore and the fuel needed to smelt it. The technique of smelting had been
learnt from the Assyrians. The new Kushite capital at Meroe became the
metallurgical centre of Africa. Iron weapons gave the Kushites the
advantages over their neighbours which northern peoples had enjoyed in the
past over Egypt, and iron tools extended the area which could be cultivated.
On this basis was to rest some 300 years of prosperity and civilization in the
Sudan, though later than the age we are now considering.
It is clear that the history of man in the Americas is much shorter than that
in Africa or, indeed, than anywhere else. About 20,000 years ago, after
Mongoloid peoples had crossed into North America from Asia, they filtered
slowly southwards for thousands of years. Cave-dwellers have been traced in
the Peruvian Andes as many as 15,000 years ago. The Americas contain very
varied climates and environments; it is scarcely surprising, therefore, that
archaeological evidence shows that they threw up almost equally varied
patterns of life, based on different opportunities for hunting, food-gathering
and fishing. What they learnt from one another is probably undiscoverable.
What is indisputable is that some of these cultures arrived at the invention of
agriculture independently of the Old World.
Disagreement is still possible about when precisely this happened
because, paradoxically, a great deal is known about the early cultivation of
plants at a time when the scale on which this took place cannot reasonably
be called agriculture. It is, nevertheless, a change which comes later than in
the Fertile Crescent. Maize began to be cultivated in Mexico in about 2700
BC, but had been improved by 2000 BC in Meso-America into something like
the plant we know today. This is the sort of change which made possible the
establishment of large settled communities. Further south, potatoes and
manioc (another starchy root vegetable) also begin to appear at about this
time and a little later there are signs that maize has spread southwards from
Mexico. Everywhere, though, change is gradual; to think of an ‘agricultural
revolution’ as a sudden event is even less appropriate in the Americas than in
the Near East. Yet it had an impact which was truly revolutionary not only in

time, but beyond America itself. The sweet potato, a native of Mexico and
Central America, was to spread across the Pacific to sustain island farming
communities centuries before the European galleons of the colonial era took
it to Africa, the Indian Ocean and the Philippines.
Farming, villages, weaving and pottery all appear in Central America
before the second millennium BC and towards the end of it come the first
stirrings of the culture which produced the first recognized American
civilization, that of the Olmecs of the eastern Mexican coast. It was focused,
it seems, on important ceremonial sites with large earth pyramids. At these
sites have been found colossal monumental sculpture and fine carvings of
figures in jade. The style of this work is highly individual. It concentrates on
human and jaguar-like images, sometimes fusing them. For several centuries
after 800 BC it seems to have prevailed right across Central America as far
south as what is now El Salvador. It appears apparently without antecedents
or warning in a swampy, forested region which makes it hard to explain in
economic terms except that maize could be harvested four times a year
where there was open land in tropics supplying reliable rainfall and warmth
all year. Yet we do not know much else which helps to explain why
civilization, which elsewhere required the relative plenty of the great river
valleys, should in America have sprung from such unpromising soil.
Olmec civilization transmitted something to the future, for the gods of the
later Aztecs were to be descendants of those of the Olmecs. It may also be
that the early hieroglyphic systems of Central America originate in Olmec
times, though the first survivals of the characters of these systems follow
only a century or so after the disappearance of Olmec culture in about 400
BC. Again, we do not know why or how this happened. Much further south,
in Peru, a culture called Chavin (after a great ceremonial site) also appeared
and survived a little later than Olmec civilization to the north. It, too, had a
high level of skill in working stone and spread vigorously only to dry up
mysteriously.

What should be thought of these early lunges in the direction of
civilization is very hard to see. Whatever their significance for the future,
they are millennia behind the appearance of civilization elsewhere, whatever
the cause of that may be. When the Spanish landed in the New World nearly
2000 years after the disappearance of Olmec culture they would still find
most of its inhabitants working with stone tools. They would also find
complicated societies (and the relics of others) which had achieved prodigies
of building and organization far outrunning, for example, anything Africa
could offer after the decline of ancient Egypt. All that is clear is that there
are no unbreakable sequences in these matters.
