BOOK ONE
Before History – Beginnings
When does History begin? It is tempting to reply ‘In the beginning’, but like
many obvious answers, this soon turns out to be unhelpful. As a great Swiss
historian once pointed out in another connection, history is the one subject
where you cannot begin at the beginning. We can trace the chain of human
descent back to the appearance of vertebrates, or even to the photosynthetic
cells and other basic structures which lie at the start of life itself. We can go
back further still, to almost unimaginable upheavals which formed this
planet and even to the origins of the universe. Yet this is not ‘history’.
Common sense helps here: history is the story of mankind, of what it has
done, suffered or enjoyed. We all know that dogs and cats do not have
histories, while human beings do. Even when historians write about a
natural process beyond human control, such as the ups and downs of
climate, or the spread of a disease, they do so only because it helps us to
understand why men and women have lived (and died) in some ways rather
than others.
This suggests that all we have to do is to identify the moment at which the
first human beings step out from the shadows of the remote past. It is not
quite as simple as that, though. First, we have to know what we are looking
for, but most attempts to define humanity on the basis of observable
characteristics prove in the end arbitrary and cramping, as long arguments
about ‘ape-men’ and ‘missing links’ have shown. Physiological tests help us
to classify data but do not identify what is or is not human. That is a matter
of a definition about which disagreement is possible. Some people have
suggested that human uniqueness lies in language, yet other primates
possess vocal equipment similar to our own; when noises are made with it
which are signals, at what point do they become speech? Another famous
definition is that man is a tool-maker, but observation has cast doubt on our
uniqueness in this respect, too, long after Dr Johnson scoffed at Boswell for
quoting it to him.
What is surely and identifiably unique about the human species is not its
possession of certain faculties or physical characteristics, but what it has

done with them. That, of course, is its history. Humanity’s unique
achievement is its remarkably intense level of activity and creativity, its
cumulative capacity to create change. All animals have ways of living, some
complex enough to be called cultures. Human culture alone is progressive; it
has been increasingly built by conscious choice and selection within it as
well as by accident and natural pressure, by the accumulation of a capital of
experience and knowledge which man has exploited. Human history began
when the inheritance of genetics and behaviour which had until then
provided the only way of dominating the environment was first broken
through by conscious choice. Of course, human beings have never been able
to make their history except within limits. Those limits are now very wide
indeed, but they were once so narrow that it is impossible to identify the first
step which took human evolution away from the determination of nature. We
have for a long time only a blurred story, obscure both because the evidence
is fragmentary and because we cannot be sure exactly what we are looking
for.

1
The Foundations
The roots of history lie in the pre-human past and it is hard (but important)
to grasp just how long ago that was. If we think of a century on our calendar
as a minute on some great clock recording the passage of time, then white
Europeans began to settle in the Americas only about five minutes ago.
Slightly less than fifteen minutes before that, Christianity appeared. Rather
more than an hour ago people settled in southern Mesopotamia who were
soon to evolve the oldest civilization known to us. This is already well
beyond the furthest margin of written record; according to our clock, people
began writing down the past much less than an hour ago, too. Some six or
seven hours further back on our scale, and much more remote, we can
discern the first recognizable human beings of a modern physiological type
already established in western Europe. Behind them, anything from a
fortnight to three weeks earlier, appear the first traces of creatures with some
human characteristics whose contribution to the evolution which followed is
still in debate.
How much further back into a growing darkness we need go in order to
understand the origins of man is debatable, but it is worth considering for a
moment even larger tracts of time simply because so much happened in them
which, even if we cannot say anything very precise about it, shaped what
followed. This is because humanity was to carry forward into historical
times certain possibilities and limitations, and they were settled long ago, in
a past even more remote than the much shorter period of time –four and a
half million years or so –in which creatures with at least some claim to
human qualities are known to have existed. Though it is not our direct
concern, we need to try to understand what was in the baggage of advantages
and disadvantages with which human beings alone among the primates
emerged after these huge tracts of time as change-makers. Virtually all the
physical and much of the mental formation we still take for granted was by
then determined, fixed in the sense that some possibilities were excluded and
others were not. The crucial process is the evolution of human creatures as a
distinct branch among the primates, for it is at this fork in the line, as it were,

that we begin to look out for the station at which we get off for History. It is
here that we can hope to find the first signs of that positive, conscious
impact upon environment which marks the first stage of human
achievement.
The bedrock of the story is the earth itself. Changes recorded in fossils of
flora and fauna, in geographical forms and geological strata, narrate a drama
of epic scale lasting hundreds of millions of years. During them the shape of
the world changed out of recognition many times. Great rifts opened and
closed in its surface, coasts rose and fell; at times huge areas were covered
with a long-since vanished vegetation. Many species of plants and animals
emerged and proliferated. Most died out. Yet these ‘dramatic’ events
happened with almost unimaginable slowness. Some lasted millions of
years; even the most rapid took centuries. The creatures who lived while
they were going on could no more have perceived them than a twentieth-
century butterfly, in its three weeks or so of life, could sense the rhythm of
the seasons. Yet slowly the earth was taking shape as a collection of habitats
permitting different strains to survive. Meanwhile, biological evolution
inched forwards with almost inconceivable slowness.
Climate was the first great pacemaker of change. About forty million
years ago – an early enough point at which to begin to grapple with our story
– a long warm climatic phase began to draw to a close. It had favoured the
great reptiles and during it Antarctica had separated from Australia. There
were no ice-fields then in any part of the globe. As the world grew colder
and the new climatic conditions restricted their habitat, the great reptiles
disappeared (though some argue that the impact of a giant meteorite was the
crucial fact). But the new conditions suited other animal strains which were
already about, among them some mammals whose tiny ancestors had
appeared two hundred million years or so earlier. They now inherited the
earth, or a considerable part of it. With many breaks in sequence and
accidents of selection on the way, these strains were themselves to evolve
into the mammals which occupy our own world – ourselves included.
Crudely summarized, the main lines of this evolution were probably
determined for millions of years by astronomical cycles. As the earth’s
position changed in relation to the sun, so did climate. A huge pattern
emerges, of recurrent swings of temperature. The extremes which resulted,
of climatic cooling on the one hand and aridity on the other, choked off some
possible lines of development. Conversely, in other times, and in certain

places, the onset of appropriately benign conditions allowed certain species
to flourish and encouraged their spread into new habitats. The only major
sub-division of this immensely long process which concerns us comes very
recently (in prehistoric terms), slightly less than four million years ago.
There then began a period of climatic changes which we believe to have
been more rapid and violent than any observed in earlier times. ‘Rapid’, we
must again remind ourselves, is a comparative term; these changes took tens
of thousands of years. Such a pace of change, though, looks very different
from the millions of years of much steadier conditions which lay in the past.
Scholars have long talked about ‘Ice Ages’, each lasting between fifty and
a hundred thousand years, which covered big areas of the northern
hemisphere (including much of Europe, and America as far south as modern
New York) with great ice sheets, sometimes a mile or more thick. They have
now distinguished some seventeen to nineteen (there is argument about the
exact number) such ‘glaciations’ since the onset of the first, over three
million years ago. We live in a warm period following the most recent of
them, which came to an end some ten thousand years ago. Evidence of these
glaciations and their effects is now available from all oceans and continents
and they provide the backbone for prehistoric chronology. To the external
scale which the Ice Ages provide we can relate such clues as we have to the
evolution of humanity.
The Ice Ages make it easy to see how climate determined life and its
evolution in prehistoric times, but to emphasize their dramatic direct effects
is misleading. No doubt the slow onset of the ice was decisive and often
disastrous for what lay in its path. Many of us still live in landscapes shaped
by its scouring and gougings thousands of centuries ago. The huge
inundations which followed the retreat of the ice as it melted must also have
been locally catastrophic, destroying the habitats of creatures which had
adapted to the challenge of arctic conditions. Yet they also created new
opportunities. After each glaciation new species spread into the areas
uncovered by the thaw. Beyond regions directly affected, though, the effects
of the glaciations may have been even more important for the global story of
evolution. Changes in environment followed cooling and warming thousands
of miles from the ice itself; and the outcome had its own determining force.
Both aridification and the spread of grassland, for instance, changed the
possibilities of species spreading themselves into new areas, especially if
they could stand upright and move on two feet. Some of those species form

part of the human evolutionary story, and all the most important stages in
that evolution – so far observed – have been located in Africa, far from the
ice-fields.
Climate can still be very important today, as contemplation of the disasters
caused by drought show. But such effects, even when they affect millions of
people, are not so fundamental as the slow transformation of the basic
geography of the world and its supplies of food which climate wrought in
prehistoric times. Until very recently climate determined where and how
humans lived. It made technique very important (and still does): the
possession in early times of a skill such as fishing or fire-making could make
new environments available to branches of the human family fortunate
enough to possess such skills, or able to discover and learn them. Different
food-gathering possibilities in different habitats meant different chances of a
varied diet and, eventually, of progressing from gathering to hunting, and
then to growing. Long before the Ice Ages, though, and even before the
appearance of the creatures from which humanity was to evolve, climate was
setting the stage for and thus shaping, by selection, the eventual genetic
inheritance of humanity itself.
One more backward glance is useful before plunging into the still shallow
(though gradually deepening) pool of evidence. Fifty-five million or so years
ago, primitive mammals were of two main sorts. One, rodentlike, remained
on the ground; the other took or had taken to the trees. In this way the
competition of the two families for resources was lessened and strains of
each survived to people the world with the creatures we know today. The
second group were the prosimians. We are among their descendants, for they
were the ancestors of the first primates.
It is best not to be too impressed by talk about ‘ancestors’ in any but the
most general sense. Between the prosimians and ourselves lie millions of
generations and many evolutionary blind alleys. It is important none the less
that our remotest identifiable ancestors lived in trees because what survived
in the next phase of evolution were genetic strains best suited to the special
uncertainties and accidental challenges of the forest. That environment put a
premium on the capacity to learn. Those survived whose genetic inheritance
could respond and adapt to the surprising, sudden danger of deep shade,
confused visual patterns, treacherous handholds. Strains prone to accident in
such conditions were wiped out. Among those that prospered (genetically
speaking) were some species with long digits which were to develop into

fingers and, eventually, the oppositional thumb, and other forerunners of the
apes already embarked upon an evolution towards three-dimensional vision
and the diminution of the importance of the sense of smell.
The prosimians were little creatures. Tree-shrews still exist which give us
some idea of what they were like; they were far from being monkeys, let
alone men. Yet for millions of years they carried the traits which made
humanity possible. During this time geography counted for much in their
evolution, by imposing limits on contact between different strains,
sometimes effectively isolating them, and thus increasing differentiation.
Changes would not happen quickly but it is likely that fragmentations of the
environment caused by geographical disturbance led to the isolation of zones
in which, little by little, the recognizable ancestors of many modern
mammals appeared. Among them are the first monkeys and apes. They do
not seem to go back more than thirty-five million years or so.
These monkeys and apes represent a great evolutionary stride. Both
families had much greater manipulative dexterity than any predecessor.
Within them, species distinct in size or acrobatic quality began to evolve.
Physiological and psychological evolution blur in such matters. Like the
development of better and stereoscopic vision, the growth of manipulative
power seems to imply a growth of consciousness. Perhaps some of these
creatures could distinguish different colours. The brains of the first primates
were already much more complex than those of any of their predecessors;
they were bigger, too. Somewhere the brain of one or more of these strains
became complex enough and its physical powers sufficiently developed for
the animal to cross the line at which the world as a mass of undifferentiated
sensations becomes at least in part a world of objects. Whenever this
happened it was a decisive step towards mastering the world by using it,
instead of reacting automatically to it.
Some twenty-five or thirty million years ago, as desiccation began to
reduce the area of the forests, competition for diminishing forest resources
became fiercer. Environmental challenge and opportunity appeared where
the trees and the grasslands met. Some primates, not powerful enough to
hold on to their forest homes, were able, because of some genetic quality, to
penetrate the savannahs in search of food and could meet the challenge and
exploit the opportunities. Probably they had a posture and movement
marginally more like that of men than, say, that of the gorillas or
chimpanzees. An upright stance and the capacity to move easily on two feet

make it possible to carry burdens, among them food. The dangerous open
savannah could then be explored and its resources withdrawn from it to a
safer home base. Most animals consume their food where they find it; man
does not. Freedom to use the forelimbs for something other than locomotion
or fighting also suggests other possibilities. We cannot confirm what the first
‘tool’ was, but primates other than man have been seen to pick up objects
which come to hand and wave them as a deterrent, use them as weapons, or
investigate and expose possible sources of food with their aid.
The next step in the argument is enormous, for it takes us to the first
glimpse of a member of the biological family to which both man and the
great apes belong. The evidence is fragmentary, but suggests that some
fifteen or sixteen million years ago a very successful species was widespread
throughout Africa, Europe and Asia. Probably it was a tree-dweller and
certainly specimens were not very large – they may have weighed about
forty pounds. Unfortunately, the evidence is such as to leave it isolated in
time. We have no direct knowledge of its immediate forebears or
descendants, but some kind of fork in the road of primate evolution had
occurred. While one branch was to lead to the great apes and chimpanzees,
the other led to human beings. This line has been named ‘hominid’. But the
first hominid fossils (found in Kenya and Ethiopia) are dated only some four
and a half to five million years ago, so that for about ten million years the
record is obscure. During that time big geological and geographical changes
must have favoured and disfavoured many new evolutionary patterns.
The earliest surviving hominid fossils belong to a species which may or
may not provide the ancestors for the small hominids which eventually
emerged over a wide area of east and south-east Africa after this huge period
of upheaval. They belong to the family now called Australopithecus. The
earliest fragments of their fossils have been identified as over four million
years old, but the oldest complete skull and a nearly complete skeleton found
near Johannesburg in 1998 are probably at least half-a-million years
‘younger’ than that. This is not very different (allowing for the generous
stretches of time and approximation available in prehistoric chronology)
from the dating of ‘Lucy’, formerly the most complete specimen of
Australopithecus discovered (in Ethiopia). Evidence of other species of
‘australopithecines’ (as they are usually termed), found as far apart as Kenya
and the Transvaal, can be dated to various periods over the next two million
years and has had a great impact upon archaeological thinking. Since 1970,

something like three million years has been added to the period in which the
search for human origins goes on, thanks to the australopithecine
discoveries. Great uncertainty and much debate still surrounds them, but if
the human species has a common ancestor it seems most likely that it
belonged to a species of this genus. It is with Australopithecus, though, and
with what, for want of a better word, we must call its ‘contemporaries’ of
other species, that the difficulties of distinguishing between apes, manlike
apes and other creatures with some human characteristics first appear in their
full complexity. The questions raised are still becoming in some ways more
difficult to deal with. No simple picture has yet emerged and discoveries are
still being made.
We have most evidence about Australopithecus. But there came to live
contemporaneously with some australopithecine species other, more manlike
creatures, to whom the genus name Homo has been given. Homo was no
doubt related to Australopithecus, but is first clearly identifiable as distinct
about two million years ago on certain African sites; remains attributed to
one of his species, however, have been dated by radioactivity to some
million and a half years before that. But, to make confusion worse, the
remains of an even bigger hominid have turned up near Lake Rudolf in
northern Kenya. About five feet tall, with a brain about twice the size of a
modern chimpanzee’s, he has the undignified name of ‘1470 man’, that
being the number attached to his relics in the catalogue of the Kenya
museum where they are to be found.
Where specialists disagree and may be expected to go on arguing about
such fragmentary evidence as we have (all that is left of two million or so
years of hominid life could be put on a big table), laymen had better not
dogmatize. Yet it is clear enough that we can be fairly certain about the
extent to which some characteristics later observable in humans already
existed more than two million years ago. We know, for instance, that the
australopithecines, though smaller than modern humans, had legbones and
feet which were manlike rather than apelike. We know they walked upright
and could run and carry loads for long distances as apes could not. Their
hands showed a flattening at the fingertips characteristic of those of men.
These are stages far advanced on the road of human physique, even if the
actual descent of our species is from some other branch of the hominid tree.
It is to early members of the genus Homo (sometimes distinguished as
Homo habilis), none the less, that we owe our first relics of tools. Tool-using

is not confined to men, but the making of tools has long been thought of as a
human characteristic. It is a notable step in winning a livelihood from the
environment. Tools found in Ethiopia are the oldest which we have (about
two and a half million years old) and they consist of stones crudely
fashioned by striking flakes off pebbles to give them an edge. The pebbles
seem often to have been carried purposefully and perhaps selectively to the
site where they were prepared. Conscious creation of implements had begun.
Simple pebble choppers of the same type from later times turn up all over
the Old World of prehistory; about one million years ago, for example, they
were in use in the Jordan valley. In Africa, therefore, begins the flow of what
was to prove the biggest single body of evidence about prehistoric man and
his precursors and the one which has provided most information about their
distribution and cultures. A site at the Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania has
provided the traces of the first identified building, a windbreak of stones
which has been dated 1.9 million years ago, as well as evidence that its
inhabitants were meat-eaters, in the form of bones smashed to enable the
marrow and brains to be got at and eaten raw.
Olduvai prompts a tempting speculation. The bringing of stones and meat
to the site combines with other evidence to suggest that the children of early
hominids could not easily cling to their mother for long foraging expeditions
as do the offspring of other primates. It may be that this is the first trace of
the human institution of the home base. Among primates, only humans have
them: places where females and children normally stay while the males
search for food to bring back to them. Such a base also implies the shady
outlines of sexual differentiation in economic roles. It might even register
the achievement of some degree of forethought and planning, in that food
was not devoured to gratify the immediate appetite on the spot where it was
taken, but reserved for family consumption elsewhere. Whether hunting, as
opposed to scavenging from carcasses (now known to have been done by
australopithecines), took place is another question, but the meat of large
animals was consumed at a very early date at Olduvai.
Yet such exciting evidence only provides tiny and isolated islands of hard
fact. It cannot be presumed that the East African sites were necessarily
typical of those which sheltered and made possible the emergence of
humanity; we know about them only because conditions there allowed the
survival and subsequent discovery of early hominid remains. Nor, though the
evidence may incline that way, can we be sure that any of these hominids is

a direct ancestor of humanity; they may all only be precursors. What can be
said is that these creatures show remarkable evolutionary efficiency in the
creative manner we associate with human beings, and suggest the
uselessness of categories such as ape-men (or men-apes) – and that few
scholars would now be prepared to say categorically that we are not directly
descended from Homo habilis, the species first identified with tool-using.
It is also easy to believe that the invention of the home base made
biological survival easier. It would have made possible brief periods of rest
and recovery from the hazards posed by sickness and accident, thus
sidestepping, however slightly, the process of evolution by physical
selection. Together with their other advantages, it may help to explain how
examples of the genus Homo were able to leave traces of themselves
throughout most of the world outside the Americas and Australasia in the
next million or so years. But we do not know for certain whether this was
through the spread of one stock, or because similar creatures evolved in
different places. It is generally held, though, that tool-making was carried to
Asia and India (and perhaps to Europe) by migrants originally from East
Africa. The establishment and survival in so many different places of these
hominids must show a superior capacity to grapple with changing
conditions, but in the end we do not know what was the behavioural secret
which suddenly (to continue to talk in terms of prehistoric time) released that
capacity and enabled them to spread over the landmass of Africa and Asia.
No other mammal settled so widely and successfully before our own branch
of the human family, which was eventually to occupy every continent except
Antarctica, a unique biological achievement.
The next clear stage in human evolution is nothing less than a revolution
in physique. After a divergence between hominids and more ape-like
creatures, which may have occurred more than four million years ago, it took
rather less than two million years for one successful family of hominids to
increase its brain size to about twice that of Australopithecus. One of the
most important stages of this process and some of the most crucial in the
evolution of humanity were already reached in a species called Homo
erectus. It was already widespread and successful a million years ago, and
had by then spread into Europe and Asia. The oldest specimen of the species
so far found may be about half a million years older than that, while the last
evidence for its survival (from Java) suggests members of it were still living
between thirty and fifty thousand years ago. Homo erectus therefore

successfully exploited a much bigger environment than Homo habilis and
did so for much longer than has Homo sapiens, the branch of hominids to
which we belong. Many signs once more point to an African origin and
thence to a spread through Europe and Asia (where Homo erectus was first
found). Apart from fossils, a special tool helps to plot the distribution of the
new species by defining areas into which Homo erectus did not spread as
well as those into which he did. This is the so-called ‘hand-axe’ of stone,
whose main use seems to have been for skinning and cutting up large
animals (its use as an axe in the usual, hafted sense seems unlikely, but the
name is established). There can be no doubt of the success of Homo erectus
as a genetic product.
When we finish with Homo erectus there is no precise dividing line (there
never is in human prehistory, a fact it is only too easy to overlook or forget),
but we are already dealing with a creature who has added to the upright
stance of his predecessors a brain approaching that of modern man in
magnitude. Though we still know only a little of the way in which the brain
is organized, there is, allowing for body size, a rough correlation between
size and intelligence. It is reasonable, therefore, to attribute great importance
to the selection of strains with bigger brains and to reckon this a huge
advance in the story of the slow accumulation of human characteristics.
Bigger brains meant bigger skulls and other changes, too. An increase in
antenatal size requires changes in the female pelvis to permit the birth of
offspring with larger heads, and another consequence was a longer period of
growth after birth; physiological evolution in the female was not sufficient to
provide antenatal accommodation to any point approaching physical
maturity. Human children need maternal care long after birth. Prolonged
infancy and immaturity in their turn imply prolonged dependency: it is a
long time before such infants can gather their own food. It may be with the
offspring of Homo erectus that there began that long extension of tolerated
immaturity, whose latest manifestation is the maintenance of young people
by society during long periods of higher education.
Biological change also meant that care and nurture came gradually to
count for more than large litters in ensuring the survival of the species. This
in turn implied further and sharper differentiation in the roles of the sexes.
Females were being pinned down much more by maternity at a time when
food-gathering techniques seem to have become more elaborate and to
demand arduous and prolonged cooperative action by males – perhaps

because bigger creatures needed more and better food. Psychologically, too,
the change may be significant. A new emphasis on the individual is one
concomitant of prolonged infancy. Perhaps it was intensified by a social
situation in which the importance of learning and memory was becoming
more and more important and skills more complex. About this point the
mechanics of what is going forward begin to slip from our grasp (if, indeed,
they were ever in it). We are somewhere near the area in which the genetic
programming of the hominids is infringed by learning. This is the beginning
of the great change from the natural physical endowment to tradition and
culture – and eventually to conscious control – as evolutionary selectors,
though we may never be able to say where precisely this change occurs.
Another important physiological change is the loss of oestrus by the
female hominid. We do not know when this happened, but after it had been
completed her sexual rhythm was importantly differentiated from that of
other animals. Man is the only animal in which the mechanism of the oestrus
(the restriction of the female’s sexual attractiveness and receptivity to the
limited periods in which she is on heat) has entirely disappeared. It is easy to
see the evolutionary connection between this and the prolongation of
infancy: if female hominids had undergone the violent disruption of their
ordinary routine which the oestrus imposes, their offspring would have been
periodically exposed to a neglect which would have made their survival
impossible. The selection of a genetic strain which dispensed with oestrus,
therefore, was essential to the survival of the species; such a strain must have
been available, though the process in which it emerged may have taken a
million or a million and a half years because it cannot have been effected
consciously.
Such a change has radical implications. The increasing attractiveness and
receptivity of females to males make individual choice much more
significant in mating. The selection of a partner is less shaped by the rhythm
of nature; we are at the start of a very long and obscure road which leads to
the idea of sexual love. Together with prolonged infant dependency, the new
possibilities of individual selection point ahead also to the stable and
enduring family unit of father, mother and offspring, an institution unique to
mankind. Some have even speculated that incest taboos (which are in
practice well-nigh universal, however much the precise identification of the
prohibited relationships may vary) originate in the recognition of the dangers
presented by socially immature but sexually adult young males for long

periods in close association with females who are always potentially
sexually receptive.

In such matters it is best to be cautious. The evidence can take us only a
very little way. Moreover, it is drawn from a very long span of time, a huge
period which would have given time for considerable physical,
psychological and technological evolution. The earliest forms of Homo
erectus may not have been much like the last, some of whom have been
classified by some scientists as archaic forms of the next evolutionary stage
of the hominid line. Yet all reflections support the general hypothesis that the
changes in hominids observable while Homo erectus occupies the centre of
our stage were especially important in defining the arcs within which
humanity was to evolve. He had unprecedented capacity to manipulate his
environment, feeble though his handhold on it may seem to us. Besides the
hand-axes which make possible the observation of his cultural traditions, late
forms of Homo erectus left behind the earliest surviving traces of
constructed dwellings (huts, sometimes fifty feet long, built of branches,
with stone-slab or skin floors), the earliest worked wood, the first wooden
spear and the earliest container, a wooden bowl. Creation on such a scale
hints strongly at a new level of mentality, at a conception of the object
formed before manufacture is begun, and perhaps an idea of process. Some
have argued far more. In the repetition of simple forms, triangles, ellipses
and ovals, in huge numbers of examples of stone tools, there has been
discerned intense care to produce regular shapes which does not seem
proportionate to any small gain in efficiency which may have been achieved.
Can there be discerned in this the first tiny budding of the aesthetic sense?
The greatest of prehistoric technical and cultural advances was made
when some of these creatures learnt how to manage fire. Until recently, the
earliest available evidence of its use came from China, and probably from
between three and five hundred thousand years ago. But very recent
discoveries in the Transvaal have provided evidence, convincing to many
scholars, that hominids there were using fire well before that. It remains
fairly certain that Homo erectus never learnt how to make fire and that even
his successors did not for a long time possess this skill. That he knew how to
use it, on the other hand, is indisputable. The importance of this knowledge
is attested by the folklore of many later peoples; in almost all of them a
heroic figure or magical beast first seizes fire. A violation of the supernatural
order is implied: in the Greek legend Prometheus steals the fire of the gods.
This is suggestive, not solid, but perhaps the first fire was taken from
outbreaks of natural gas or volcanic activity. Culturally, economically,

socially and technologically, fire was a revolutionary instrument – if we
again remember that a prehistoric ‘revolution’ took millennia. It brought the
possibility of warmth and light and therefore of a double extension of the
habitable environment, into the cold and into the dark. In physical terms, one
obvious expression of this was the occupation of caves. Animals could now
be driven out and kept out by fire (and perhaps the seed lies here of the use
of fire to drive big game in hunting). Technology could move forward:
spears could be hardened in fires and cooking became possible, indigestible
substances such as seeds becoming sources of food and distasteful or bitter
plants edible. This must have stimulated attention to the variety and
availability of plant life; the science of botany was stirring without anyone
knowing it.
Fire must have influenced mentality more directly, too. It was another
factor strengthening the tendency to conscious inhibition and restraint, and
therefore their evolutionary importance. The focus of the cooking fire as the
source of light and warmth had also the deep psychological power which it
still retains. Around the hearths after dark gathered a community almost
certainly already aware of itself as a small and meaningful unit against a
chaotic and unfriendly background. Language – of whose origins we as yet
know nothing – would have been sharpened by a new kind of group
intercourse. The group itself would be elaborated, too, in its structure. At
some point, fire-bearers and fire specialists appeared, beings of awesome
and mysterious importance, for on them depended life and death. They
carried and guarded the great liberating tool, and the need to guard it must
sometimes have made them masters. Yet the deepest tendency of this new
power always ran towards the liberation of mankind. Fire began to break up
the iron rigidity of night and day and even the discipline of the seasons. It
thus carried further the breakdown of the great objective natural rhythms
which bound our fireless ancestors. Behaviour could be less routine and
automatic. There is even a discernible possibility of leisure.
Big-game hunting was the other great achievement of Homo erectus. Its
origins must lie far back in the scavenging which turned vegetarian hominids
into omnivores. Meat-eating provided concentrated protein. It released meat-
eaters from the incessant nibbling of so many vegetarian creatures, and so
permitted economies of effort. It is one of the first signs that the capacity for
conscious restraint is at work when food is being carried home to be shared
tomorrow rather than consumed on the spot today. At the beginning of the

archaeological record, an elephant and perhaps a few giraffes and buffaloes
were among the beasts whose scavenged meat was consumed at Olduvai, but
for a long time the bones of smaller animals vastly preponderate in the
rubbish. By about three hundred thousand years ago the picture is wholly
altered.
This may be where we can find a clue to the way by which
Australopithecus and his relatives were replaced by the bigger, more
efficient Homo erectus. A new food supply permits larger consumption but
also imposes new environments: game has to be followed if meat-eating
becomes general. As the hominids become more or less parasitic upon other
species there follows further exploration of territory and new settlements,
too, as sites particularly favoured by the mammoth or woolly rhinoceros are
identified. Knowledge of such facts has to be learnt and passed on; technique
has to be transmitted and guarded, for the skills required to trap, kill and
dismember the huge beasts of antiquity were enormous in relation to
anything which preceded them. What is more, they were cooperative skills:
only large numbers could carry out so complex an operation as the driving –
perhaps by fire – of game to a killing-ground favourable because of bogs in
which a weighty creature would flounder, or because of a precipice, well-
placed vantage points, or secure platforms for the hunters. Few weapons
were available to supplement natural traps and, once dead, the victims
presented further problems. With only wood, stone and flint, they had to be
cut up and removed to the home base. Once carried home, the new supplies
of meat mark another step towards the provision of leisure as the consumer
is released for a time from the drudgery of ceaselessly rummaging in his
environment for small, but continuously available, quantities of
nourishment.
It is very difficult not to feel that this is an epoch of crucial significance.
Considered against a background of millions of years of evolution, the pace
of change, though still unbelievably slow in terms of later societies, is
quickening. These are not men as we know them, but they are beginning to
be manlike creatures: the greatest of predators is beginning to stir in his
cradle. Something like a true society, too, is dimly discernible, not merely in
the complicated cooperative hunting enterprises, but in what this implies in
passing on knowledge from generation to generation. Culture and tradition
are slowly taking over from genetic mutation and natural selection as the
primary sources of change among the hominids. It is the groups with the best

‘memories’ of effective techniques which will carry forward evolution. The
importance of experience was very great, for knowledge of methods which
were likely to succeed rested upon it, not (as increasingly in modern society)
on experiment and analysis. This fact alone would have given new
importance to the older and more experienced. They knew how things were
done and what methods worked and they did so at a time when the home
base and big-game hunting made their maintenance by the group easier.
They would not have been very old, of course. Very few can have lived more
than forty years.
Selection also favoured those groups whose members not only had good
memories but the increasing power to reflect upon it given by speech. We
know very little about the prehistory of language. Modern types of language
can only have appeared long after Homo erectus disappeared. Yet some sort
of communication must have been used in big-game hunting, and all
primates make meaningful signals. How early hominids communicated may
never be known, but one plausible suggestion is that they began by breaking
up calls akin to those of other animals into particular sounds capable of
rearrangement. This would give the possibility of different messages and
may be the remote tap-root of grammar. What is certain is that a great
acceleration of evolution would follow the appearance of groups able to pool
experience, to practise and refine skills, to elaborate ideas through language.
Once more, we cannot separate one process from others: better vision, an
increased physical capacity to deal with the world as a set of discrete objects
and the multiplication of artifacts by using tools were all going on
simultaneously over the hundreds of thousands of years in which language
was evolving. Together they contributed to a growing extension of mental
capacity until one day conceptualization became possible and abstract
thought appeared.
It remains true, though, that if nothing very general can be confidently
said about the behaviour of hominids before man, still less can anything very
precise be confirmed. We move in a fog, dimly apprehending for a moment
creatures now more, now less, manlike and familiar. Their minds, we can be
sure, are almost inconceivably unlike our own as instruments for the
registration of the outside world. Yet when we look at the range of the
attributes of Homo erectus it is his human, not pre-human, characteristics
which are most striking. Physically, he has a brain of an order of magnitude
comparable to our own. He makes tools (and does so within more than one

technical tradition), builds shelters, takes over natural refuges by exploiting
fire, and sallies out of them to hunt and gather his food. He does this in
groups with a discipline which can sustain complicated operations; he
therefore has some ability to exchange ideas by speech. The basic biological
units of his hunting groups probably prefigure the nuclear human family,
being founded on the institutions of the home base and a sexual
differentiation of activity. There may even be some complexity of social
organization in so far as fire-bearers and gatherers or old creatures whose
memories made them the databanks of their ‘societies’ could be supported
by the labour of others. There has to be some social organization to permit
the sharing of cooperatively obtained food, too. There is nothing to be
usefully added to an account such as this by pretending to say where exactly
can be found a prehistorical point or dividing line at which such things had
come to be, but subsequent human history is unimaginable without them.
When a sub-species of Homo erectus, perhaps possessing slightly larger and
more complex brains than others, evolved into Homo sapiens it did so with
an enormous achievement and heritage already secure in its grasp. Whether
we choose to call it human or not hardly matters.

2
Homo Sapiens
The appearance of Homo sapiens is momentous: here, at last, is recognizable
humanity, however raw in form. Yet this evolutionary step is another
abstraction. It is the end of the prologue and the beginning of the main
drama, but we cannot usefully ask precisely when this happens. It is a
process, not a point in time, and it is not a process occurring everywhere at
the same rate. All we have to date it are a few physical relics of early
humans of types recognizably modern or closely related to the modern.
Some of them may well overlap by thousands of years the continuing life of
earlier hominids. Some may represent false starts and dead ends, for human
evolution must have continued to be highly selective. Though much faster
than in earlier times, this evolution is still very slow: we are dealing with
something that took place over perhaps two hundred thousand years in
which we do not know when our first true ‘ancestor’ appeared (though the
place was almost certainly Africa). It is not ever easy to pose the right
questions; the physiological and technical and mental lines at which we
leave Homo erectus behind are matters of definition, and during tens of
millennia that species and early specimens of Homo sapiens both lived on
the earth.
The few early human fossils have provoked much argument. Two famous
European skulls seem to belong to the period between two Ice Ages about
two hundred thousand years ago, an age climatically so different from ours
that elephants browsed in a semi-tropical Thames valley and the ancestors of
lions prowled about in what would one day be Yorkshire. The ‘Swanscombe’
skull, named after the place where it was found, shows its possessor to have
had a big brain (about 1300 cc) but in other ways not much to resemble
modern man: if ‘Swanscombe man’ was Homo sapiens, then he represents a
very early version. The other skull, that of ‘Steinheim man’, differs in shape
from that of Homo sapiens but again held a big brain. Perhaps they are best
regarded as the forerunners of early prototypes of Homo sapiens, though
creatures still living (as their tools show) much like Homo erectus.

The next Ice Age then brings down the curtain. When it lifts, a hundred
and thirty thousand or so years ago, in the next warm period, human remains
again appear. There has been much argument about what they show but it is
indisputable that there has been a great step forward. At this point we are
entering a period where there is a fairly dense though broken record.
Creatures we can now call humans lived in Europe just over a hundred
thousand years ago. There are caves in the Dordogne area which were
occupied on and off for some fifty thousand years after that. The cultures of
these peoples therefore survived a period of huge climatic change; the first
traces of them belong to a warm interglacial period and the last run out in the
middle of the last Ice Age. This is an impressive continuity to set against
what must have been great variation in the animal population and vegetation
near these sites; to survive so long, such cultures must have been very
resourceful and adaptive.
For all their essential similarity to ourselves, though, the peoples who
created these cultures are still physiologically distinguishable from modern
human beings. The first discovery of their remains was at Neanderthal in
Germany (because of this, humans of this type are usually called
Neanderthals) and it was of a skull so curiously shaped that it was for a long
time thought to be that of a modern idiot. Scientific analysis still leaves
much about it unexplained. But it is now suggested that Homo sapiens
neanderthalis (as the Neanderthal is scientifically classified) has its ultimate
origin in an early expansion out of Africa of advanced forms of Homo
erectus, possibly a million years ago. Across many intervening genetic
stages, there emerged a population of pre-Neanderthals, from which, in turn,
the extreme form evolved whose striking remains were found in Europe
(and, so far, nowhere else). This special development has been interpreted by
some as a Neanderthal sub-species, perhaps cut off by some accident of
glaciation. Evidence of other Neanderthalers has turned up elsewhere, in
Morocco, in the northern Sahara, at Mount Carmel in Palestine and
elsewhere in the Near East and Iran. They have also been traced in Central
Asia and China, where the earliest specimens may go back something like
two hundred millennia. Evidently, this was for a long time a highly
successful species.
Eighty thousand years ago, the artifacts of Neanderthal man had spread all
over Eurasia and they show differences of technique and form. But
technology from over a hundred thousand years ago, and associated with

other forms of ‘anatomically modern humans’, as scholars term other
creatures evolved from advanced forms of Homo erectus, has been identified
in parts of Africa. Moreover, it was more widely spread than that of
Neanderthal man. The primeval cultural unity had thus already fragmented,
and distinct cultural traditions were beginning to emerge. From the start,
there is a kind of provincialism within a young humanity.
Neanderthal man, like the different species which specialists refer to as
anatomically modern, walked erect and had a big brain. Though in other
ways more primitive than the sub-species to which we belong, Homo sapiens
sapiens (as the guess about the first skull suggests), he represents none the
less a great evolutionary stride and shows a new mental sophistication we
can still hardly grasp, let alone measure. One striking example is the use of
technology to overcome environment: we know from the evidence of skin-
scrapers they used to dress skins and pelts that Neanderthals wore clothes
(though none have survived; the oldest clothed body yet discovered, in
Russia, has been dated to about thirty-five thousand years ago). Even this
important advance in the manipulation of environment, though, is nothing
like so startling as the appearance in Neanderthal culture of formal burial.
The act of burial itself is momentous for archaeology; graves are of
enormous importance because of the artifacts of ancient society they
preserve. Yet the Neanderthal graves provide more than this: they may also
contain the first evidence of ritual or ceremony.
It is very difficult to control speculation, and some has outrun the
evidence. Perhaps some early totemism explains the ring of horns within
which a Neanderthal child was buried near Samarkand. Some have
suggested, too, that careful burial may reflect a new concern for the
individual which was one result of the greater interdependence of the group
in the renewed Ice Ages. This could have intensified the sense of loss when a
member died and might also point to something more. A skeleton of a
Neanderthal man who had lost his right arm years before his death has been
found. He must have been very dependent on others, and was sustained by
his group in spite of his handicap.
It is tempting but more hazardous to suggest that ritualized burial implies
some view of an after-life. If true, though, this would testify to a huge power
of abstraction in the hominids and the origins of one of the greatest and most
enduring myths, that life is an illusion, that reality lies invisible elsewhere,
that things are not what they seem. Without going so far, it is at least

possible to agree that a momentous change is under way. Like the hints of
rituals involving animals which Neanderthal caves also offer here and there,
careful burial may mark a new attempt to dominate the environment. The
human brain must already have been capable of discerning questions it
wanted to answer and perhaps of providing answers in the shape of rituals.
Slightly, tentatively, clumsily – however we describe it and still in the
shallows though it may be – the human mind is afloat; the greatest of all
voyages of exploration has begun.
Neanderthal man also provides our first evidence of another great
institution, warfare. It may have been practised in connection with
cannibalism, which was directed apparently to the eating of the brains of
victims. Analogy with later societies suggests that here again we have the
start of some conceptualizing about a soul or spirit; such acts are sometimes
directed to acquiring the magical or spiritual power of the vanquished.
Whatever the magnitude of the evolutionary step which the Neanderthals
represent, however, they failed in the end as a species. After long and
widespread success they were not in the end to be the inheritors of the earth.
Effectively, Neanderthal survivors were to be genetically ‘vanquished’ by
another strain of Homo sapiens, and about the reasons for this we know
nothing. Nor can we know to what extent, if at all, it was mitigated by some
genetic transmission through the mingling of stocks.
The successor both to Neanderthal man and the archaic human forms
among whom he first appeared was Homo sapiens sapiens, the species to
which we all belong. Biologically, it has been outstandingly successful,
spreading all over Eurasia within a hundred thousand or so years of its first
appearances in Africa (they are dated to about 135,000 BC) and eventually all
over the world. Its members are from the start anatomically identifiable
modern humans, with smaller faces, a lighter skull and straighter limbs than
the Neanderthals. From Africa they entered the Levant and the Middle East,
duly progressing to central and further Asia, and eventually reaching
Australasia in about 40,000 BC. By then, they were beginning to colonize
Europe, where they were to live for thousands of years beside the
Neanderthals. In about 15,000 BC they crossed a land bridge across what was
to be the Bering Strait to enter the Americas.
Much remains speculative in assessing the reasons for the timing and
pattern of the diffusion of Homo sapiens sapiens and palaeoanthropologists
remain cautious about the fossil record; some of them do not like to assert

without qualification that remains more than thirty thousand years or so old
are indeed those of our species. Nevertheless, most agree that from about
fifty thousand years ago to the end of the last Ice Age in about 9000 BC we
are at last considering plentiful evidence of men of modern type. This period
is normally referred to as the ‘Upper’ Palaeolithic, a name derived from the
Greek for ‘old stones’. It corresponds, roughly, to the more familiar term
‘Stone Age’, but, like other contributions to the chaotic terminology of
prehistory, there are difficulties in using such words without careful
qualification.
To separate ‘Upper’ and ‘Lower’ Palaeolithic is easy; the division
represents the physical fact that the topmost layers of geological strata are
the most recent and that therefore fossils and artifacts found among them are
later than those found at lower levels. The Lower Palaeolithic is therefore
the designation of an age more ancient than the Upper. Almost all the
artifacts which survive from the Palaeolithic are made from stone; none is
made from metal, whose appearance made it possible to follow a
terminology used by the Roman poet Lucretius by labelling what comes
after the Stone Age as the Bronze and Iron Ages.
These are, of course, cultural and technological labels; their great merit is
that they direct attention to the activities of man. At one time tools and
weapons are made of stone, then of bronze, then of iron. None the less, these
terms have disadvantages, too. The obvious one is that within the huge tracts
of time in which stone artifacts provide the largest significant body of
evidence, we are dealing for the most part with hominids. They had, in
varying degree, some, but not all, human characteristics; many stone tools
were not made by men. Increasingly, too, the fact that this terminology
originated in European archaeology created difficulties as more and more
evidence accumulated about the rest of the world which did not really fit in.
A final disadvantage is that it blurs important distinctions within periods
even in Europe. The result has been its further refinement. Within the Stone
Age scholars have distinguished (in sequence) the Lower, Middle and Upper
Palaeolithic and then the Mesolithic and the Neolithic (the last of which
blurs the division attributed by the older schemes to the coming of
metallurgy). The period down to the end of the last Ice Age in Europe is also
sometimes called the Old Stone Age, another complication, because here we
have yet another principle of classification, simply that provided by
chronology. Homo sapiens sapiens appears in Europe roughly at the

beginning of the Upper Palaeolithic. It is in Europe, too, that the largest
quantity of skeletal remains has been found, and it was on this evidence that
the distinction of the species was long based.
For this period in Europe much has been done to classify and group in
sequence cultures identified by their implements. The climate was not
constant; though usually cold, there were important fluctuations, probably
including the sharp onset of the coldest conditions for a million years
somewhere about twenty thousand years ago. Such climatic variations still
exercised great determinative force on the evolution of society. It was
perhaps thirty thousand years ago that the climate changes began which later
made it possible for human beings either to enter the Americas, crossing
from Asia by a link provided by ice or by land left exposed because the ice-
caps contained so much of what is now sea-water and the sea-level was
much lower. They moved southwards for thousands of years as they
followed the game which had drawn them to the last uninhabited continent.
The Americas were from the start peopled by immigrants. But when the ice
sheets retreated, huge transformations occurred to coasts, routes and food
supplies. This was all as it had been for ages, but this time there was a
crucial difference. Man was there. A new order of intelligence was available
to use new and growing resources in order to cope with environmental
change. The change to history, when conscious human action to control
environment will increasingly be effective, is under way.
This may seem a big claim in the light of the resources early men
possessed, judging by their tool kits and weaponry. Yet they already
represent a huge range of capacities if we compare them with their
predecessors. The basic tools of Homo sapiens were stone, but they were
made to serve many more precise purposes than earlier tools and were made
in a different way, by striking flakes from a carefully prepared core. Their
variety and elaboration are another sign of the growing acceleration of
human evolution. New materials came into use in the Upper Palaeolithic,
too, as bone and antler were added to the wood and flint of earlier
workshops and armouries. These provided new possibilities of manufacture;
the bone needle was a great step in the elaboration of clothing, pressure
flaking enabled some skilled workmen to carry the refinement of their flint
blades to a point at which it seems non-utilitarian, so delicately thinned have
they become. The first man-made material, a mixture of clay with powdered
bone, also makes its appearance. Weapons are improved. The tendency,

which can be seen towards the end of the Upper Palaeolithic, for small flint
implements to appear more frequently and for them to be more regularly
geometrical suggests the making of more complex weapon points. In the
same era come the invention and spread of the spear-thrower, the bow and
arrow, and the barbed harpoon, used first on mammals and later to catch fish.
The last shows an extension of hunting – and therefore of resources – to
water. Long before this, perhaps six hundred thousand years ago, hominids
had gathered molluscs for food in China and doubtless elsewhere. With
harpoons and perhaps more perishable implements such as nets and lines,
new and richer aquatic sources of food (some created by the temperature
changes of the last Ice Ages) could now be exploited, and this led to
achievements in hunting, possibly connected with the growth of forests in
post-glacial phases and with a new dependence on and knowledge of the
movements of reindeer and wild cattle.
It is tempting to see support of this in the most remarkable and mysterious
evidence of all which has survived the men of the Upper Palaeolithic: their
art. It is the first of its kind of whose existence we can be sure. Earlier men
or even manlike creatures may have scratched patterns in the mud, daubed
their bodies, moved rhythmically in the dance or spread flowers in patterns,
but of such things we know nothing, because of them, if they ever happened,
nothing has survived. Some creature took the trouble to accumulate little
hoards of red ochre some forty or sixty thousand years ago, but the purpose
of doing so is unknown. It has been suggested that two indentations on a
Neanderthal gravestone are the earliest surviving art, but the first plentiful
and assured evidence comes in paintings on the walls of European caves.
The first were made over thirty thousand years ago and their number swells
dramatically until we find ourselves in the presence of a conscious art whose
greatest technical and aesthetic achievements appear, without warning or
forerunner, almost mature. They continue so for thousands of years until this
art vanishes. Just as it has no ancestor, it leaves no descendant, though it
seems to have employed many of the basic processes of the visual arts still in
use today.
Its concentration in space and time must be grounds for suspicion that
there is more to be discovered. Caves in Africa abound with prehistoric
paintings and carvings dated as far back as twenty-seven thousand years ago
and were being added to well into the reign of England’s Queen Victoria; in
Australia there was cave-painting at least twenty thousand years ago.

Palaeolithic art is not, therefore, confined to Europe, but what has been
discovered outside Europe has, so far, been studied much more
intermittently. We do not yet know enough about the dating of cave paintings
in other parts of the world, nor about the uniqueness of the conditions which
led to the preservation in Europe of objects which may have had parallels
elsewhere. Nor do we know what may have disappeared; there is a vast field
of possibilities of what may have been produced in gesture, sound or
perishable materials which cannot be explored. None the less, the art of
western Europe in the Upper Palaeolithic, all qualifications made, has a
colossal and solid impressiveness which is unique.
Most of it has been found in a relatively small area of south-western
France and northern Spain and consists of three main bodies of material:
small figures of stone, bone or, occasionally, clay (usually female), decorated
objects (often tools and weapons) and the painted walls and roofs of caves.
In these caves (and in the decoration of objects) there is an overwhelming
preponderance of animal themes. The meaning of these designs, above all in
the elaborate sequences of the cave-paintings, has intrigued scholars.
Obviously, many of the beasts so carefully observed were central to a
hunting economy. At least in the French caves, too, it now seems highly
probable that a conscious order exists in the sequences in which they are
shown. But to go further in the argument is still very hard. Clearly, art in
Upper Palaeolithic times has to carry much of a burden later carried by
writing, but what its messages mean is still obscure. It seems likely that the
paintings were connected with religious or magical practice: African rock
painting has been convincingly shown to be linked to magic and shamanism
and the selection of such remote and difficult corners of caves as those in
which the European paintings have been traced is by itself strongly
suggestive that some special rite was carried out when they were painted or
gazed upon. (Artificial light, of course, was needed in these dark corners.)
The origins of religion have been hinted at in Neanderthal burials and appear
even more strongly in those of the Upper Palaeolithic peoples which are
often elaborate; here, in their art, is something where inferences are even
harder to resist. Perhaps it provides the first surviving relics of organized
religion.
The birth, maturity and death of the earliest artistic achievement of
mankind in Europe occupies a very long period. Somewhere about thirty-
five thousand years ago appear decorated and coloured objects, often of bone

and ivory. Then, three or four millennia later, we reach the first figurative
art. Soon after that we reach the peak of the prehistoric aesthetic
achievement, the great painted and incised cave ‘sanctuaries’ (as they have
been called), with their processions of animals and mysterious repeated
symbolic shapes. This high phase lasted about five thousand years, a
startlingly long time for the maintenance of so consistent a style and content.
So long a period – almost as long as the whole history of civilization on this
planet – illustrates the slowness with which tradition changed in ancient
times and its imperviousness to outside influence. Perhaps it is an index, too,
of the geographical isolation of prehistoric cultures. The last phase of this
art, which has been discerned, takes the story down to about 9000 BC; in it,
the stag more and more replaces other animals as subject-matter (no doubt
thus reflecting the disappearance of the reindeer and the mammoth as the ice
retreated) before a final burst of richly decorated tools and weapons brings
Europe’s first great artistic achievement to an end. The age which followed
produced nothing approaching it in scale or quality; its best surviving relics
are a few decorated pebbles. Six thousand years were to pass before the next
great art.
We know little about the collapse of this great human achievement. The
light is never more than dim in the Upper Palaeolithic and the darkness
closes in rapidly – which is to say, of course, over thousands of years.
Nevertheless, the impression left by the violence of the contrast between
what was before and what came after produces a sense of shock. So
relatively sudden an extinction is a mystery. We have no precise dates or
even precise sequences: nothing ended in one year or another. There was
only a gradual closing down of artistic activity over a long time which seems
in the end to have been absolute. Some scholars have blamed climate.
Perhaps, they argue, the whole phenomenon of cave art was linked to efforts
to influence the movements or abundance of the great game herds on which
the hunting peoples relied. As the last Ice Age ebbed and each year the
reindeer retreated a little, men sought new and magical techniques to
manipulate them, but gradually as the ice sheets withdrew more and more,
an environment to which they had successfully adapted disappeared. As it
did, so did the hope of influencing nature. Homo sapiens was not powerless;
far from it, he could adapt, and did, to a new challenge. But for a time one
cultural impoverishment at least, the abandonment of his first art, was a
consequence of adaptation.

It is easy to see much that is fanciful in such speculation, but difficult to
restrain excitement over such an astonishing achievement. People have
spoken of the great cave sequences as ‘cathedrals’ of the Palaeolithic world
and such metaphors are justified if the level of achievement and the scale of
the work undertaken is measured against what evidence we have of the
earlier triumphs of man. With the first great art, the hominids are now left far
behind and we have unequivocal evidence of the power of the human mind.
Much else that is known of the Upper Palaeolithic confirms the sense that
the crucial genetic changes are behind and that evolution is now a mental
and social phenomenon. The distribution of major racial divisions in the
world which last down to early modern times appears already broadly fixed
by the end of the Upper Palaeolithic. Geographical and climatic divisions
had produced specializations in skin pigment, hair characteristics, the shape
of the skull and the bone structure of the face. In the earliest Chinese relics
of Homo sapiens the Mongoloid characteristics are discernible. All the main
racial groups are established by 10,000 BC, broadly speaking in the areas
they dominated until the great resettlement of the Caucasian stocks, which
was one aspect of the rise of European civilization to world domination after
AD 1500. The world was filling up during the Old Stone Age. Men at last
penetrated the virgin continents. Mongoloid peoples spread over the
Americas and had arrived in Patagonia by 6000 BC. Twenty thousand or so
years earlier, humans had spread widely through Australia, after reaching
that continent by a combination of island-hopping sea voyages and land
bridges which later disappeared. Homo sapiens was already a venturesome
fellow at the end of the last Ice Age, it seems, only Antarctica among the
continents still awaiting his arrival and establishment (as it would wait until
the year 1895 of our own era). Yet the Upper Palaeolithic world was still a
very empty place. Calculations suggest that twenty thousand humans lived in
France in Neanderthal times; this becomes possibly fifty thousand out of
perhaps ten million humans in the whole world twenty millennia ago. ‘A
human desert swarming with game’ is one scholar’s description of it. They
lived by hunting and gathering, and a lot of land was needed to support a
family.
However questionable such figures may be, if they are agreed to be of this
order of magnitude it is not hard to see that they still mean very slow cultural
change. Greatly accelerated though Man’s progress in the Old Stone Age
may be and much more versatile though he is becoming, he is still taking

thousands of years to transmit his learning across the barriers of geography
and social division. A man might, after all, live all his life without meeting
anyone from another group or tribe, let alone another culture. The divisions
which already existed between different groups of Homo sapiens open a
historical era whose whole tendency was towards the cultural distinction, if
not isolation, of one group from another, and this was to increase human
diversity until reversed by technical and political forces in very recent times.
About the groups in which Upper Palaeolithic man lived there is still
much unknown. What is clear is that they were both larger in size than in
former times and also more settled. The earliest remains of buildings come
from the hunters of the Upper Palaeolithic who inhabited what are now the
Czech and Slovak republics and southern Russia. In about 10,000 BC in parts
of France some clusters of shelters seem to have contained anything from
four to six hundred people, but judging by the archaeological record, this
was unusual. Something like the tribe probably existed, therefore, though
about its organization and hierarchies it is virtually impossible to speak. All
that is clear is that there was a continuing sexual specialization in the Old
Stone Age as hunting grew more elaborate and its skills more demanding,
while settlements provided new possibilities of vegetable gathering by
women.
Cloudy though its picture is, none the less, the earth at the end of the Old
Stone Age is in important respects one we can recognize. There were still to
be geological changes (the English Channel was only to make its latest
appearance in about 7000 BC, for example) but we have lived in a period of
comparative topographical stability which has preserved the major shapes of
the world of about 9000 BC. That world was by then firmly the world of
Homo sapiens. The descendants of the primates who came out of the trees
had, by the acquisition of their tool-making skills, by using natural materials
to make shelters and by domesticating fire, by hunting and exploiting other
animals, long achieved an important measure of independence from some of
nature’s rhythms. This had brought them to a high enough level of social
organization to undertake important cooperative works. Their needs had
provoked economic differentiation between the sexes. Grappling with these
and other material problems had led to the transmission of ideas by speech,
to the invention of ritual practices and ideas which lie at the roots of religion,
and, eventually, to a great art. It has even been argued that Upper
Palaeolithic man had a lunar calendar. Man as he leaves prehistory is already

a conceptualizing creature, equipped with intellect, with the power to
objectify and abstract. It is very difficult not to believe that it is this new
strength which explains the last and greatest stride in prehistory, the
invention of agriculture.

3
The Possibility of Civilization
Human beings have existed for at least twenty times as long as the
civilizations they have created. The waning of the last Ice Age allowed the
long march to civilization to be completed and is the immediate prelude to
History. Within five or six thousand years a succession of momentous
changes took place of which unquestionably the most important was an
increase in food supply. Nothing so sharply accelerated human development
or had such widespread results until the changes called industrialization
which have gone on over the last three centuries.
One scholar summed up these changes which mark the end of prehistory
as the ‘Neolithic revolution’. Here begins another little tangle of potentially
misleading terminology, though the last we need consider in prehistory.
Archaeologists follow the Palaeolithic era by the Mesolithic and that by the
Neolithic (some add a fourth, the Chalcolithic, by which they mean a phase
of society in which artifacts of stone and copper are in simultaneous use).
The distinction between the first two is really of interest only to the
specialist, but all these terms describe cultural facts; they identify sequences
of artifacts which show growing resources and capacities. Only the term
‘Neolithic’ need concern us. It means, at its narrowest and most precise, a
culture in which ground or polished stone tools replace chipped ones (though
other criteria are sometimes added to this). This may not seem so startling a
change as to justify the excitement over the Neolithic which has been shown
by some prehistorians, far less talk of a ‘Neolithic revolution’. In fact,
though the phrase is still sometimes used, it is unsatisfactory because it has
had to cover too many different ideas. None the less, it was an attempt to pin
down an important and complex change which took place with many local
variations and it is worthwhile to try to assess its general significance.
We can start by noting that even in the narrowest technological sense, the
Neolithic phase of human development does not begin, flower or end
everywhere at the same time. In one place it may last thousands of years
longer than in another and its beginnings are separated from what went

before, not by a clear line but by a mysterious zone of cultural change. Then,
within it, not all societies possess the same range of skills and resources;
some discover how to make pottery, as well as polished stone tools, others
go on to domesticate animals and begin to gather or raise cereal crops. Slow
evolution is the rule and not all societies had reached the same level by the
time literate civilization appears. Nevertheless, Neolithic culture is the
matrix from which civilization appears and provides the preconditions on
which it rests, and they are by no means limited to the production of the
highly finished stone tools which gave the phase its name.
We must also qualify the word ‘revolution’ when discussing this change.
Though we leave behind the slow evolutions of the Pleistocene and move
into an accelerating era of prehistory, there are still no clear-cut divisions.
They are pretty rare in later history; even when they try to do so, few
societies ever wholly break with their past. What we can observe is a slow
but radical transformation of human behaviour and organization over more
and more of the world, not a sudden new departure. It is made up of several
crucial changes which make the last period of prehistory identifiable as a
unity, whatever we call it.
At the end of the Upper Palaeolithic, Man existed physically much as we
know him. He was, of course, still to change somewhat in height and weight,
most obviously in those areas of the world where he gained in stature and
life expectancy as nutrition improved. In the Old Stone Age it was still
unlikely that a man or a woman would reach an age of forty and if they did
then they were likely to live pretty miserable lives, in our eyes prematurely
aged, tormented by arthritis, rheumatism and the casual accidents of broken
bones or rotting teeth. This would only slowly change for the better. The
shape of the human face would go on evolving, too, as diet altered. (It seems
to be only after AD 1066 that the edge-to-edge bite gave way among Anglo-
Saxons to the overbite which was the ultimate consequence of a shift to
more starch and carbohydrate, a development of some importance for the
later appearance of the English.)
The physical types of men differed in different continents, but we cannot
presume that capacities did. In all parts of the world Homo sapiens sapiens
was showing great versatility in adapting his heritage to the climatic and
geographical upheavals of the ebbing phase of the last Ice Age. In the
beginnings of settlements of some size and permanence, in the elaboration of
technology and in the growth of language and the dawn of characterization

in art lay some of the rudimentary elements of the compound which was
eventually to crystallize as civilization. But much more than these were
needed. Above all, there had to be the possibility of some sort of economic
surplus to daily requirements.
This was hardly conceivable except in occasional, specially favourable
areas of the hunting and gathering economy which sustained all human life
and was the only one known to human beings until about ten thousand years
ago. What made it possible was the invention of agriculture.
The importance of this was so great that it does seem to justify a strong
metaphor and ‘farming revolution’ or ‘food-gathering revolution’ are terms
whose meaning is readily clear. They single out the fact which explains why
the Neolithic era could provide the circumstances in which civilizations
could appear. Even a knowledge of metallurgy, which was spreading in some
societies during their Neolithic phases, is not so fundamental. Farming truly
revolutionized the conditions of human existence and it is the main thing to
bear in mind when considering the meaning of Neolithic, a meaning once
concisely summarized as ‘a period between the end of the hunting way of
life and the beginning of a full metal-using economy, when the practice of
farming arose and spread through most of Europe, Asia and North Africa
like a slow-moving wave’. The essentials of agriculture are the growing of
crops and the practice of animal husbandry. How these came about and at
what places and times is more mysterious. Some environments must have
helped more than others; while some peoples pursued game across plains
uncovered by the retreating ice, others were intensifying the skills needed to
exploit the new, prolific river valleys and coastal inlets rich in edible plants
and fish. The same must be true of cultivation and herding. On the whole,
the Old World of Africa and Eurasia was better off for animals which might
be domesticated than what would later be called the Americas.
