The only other area where a startlingly high level of achievement in stone-
working was reached was western Europe. This has led enthusiasts to claim
it as another seat of early ‘civilization’, almost as if its inhabitants were
some sort of depressed class needing historical rehabilitation. Europe has
already been touched upon as a supplier of metals to the ancient Near East.
Yet, though much that we now find interesting was happening there in
prehistoric times, it does not provide a very impressive or striking story. In
the history of the world, prehistoric Europe has little except illustrative
importance. To the great civilizations which rose and fell in the river valleys
of the Near East, Europe was largely an irrelevance. It sometimes received
the impress of the outside world but contributed only marginally and fitfully
to the process of historic change. A parallel might be Africa at a later date,
interesting for its own sake, but not for any special and positive contribution
to world history. It was to be a very long time before men would even be
able to conceive that there existed a geographical, let alone a cultural, unity
corresponding to the later idea of Europe. To the ancient world, the northern
lands where the barbarians came from before they appeared in Thrace were
irrelevant (and most of them probably came from further east anyway). The
north-western hinterland was only important because it occasionally
disgorged commodities wanted in Asia and the Aegean.
There is not much to say, therefore, about prehistoric Europe, but in order
to get a correct perspective, one more point should be made. Two Europes
must be distinguished. One is that of the Mediterranean coasts and their
peoples. Its rough boundary is the line which delimits the cultivation of the
olive. South of this line, literate, urban civilization comes fairly quickly once
we are into the Iron Age, and apparently after direct contact with more
advanced areas. By 800 BC the coasts of the western Mediterranean were

already beginning to experience fairly continuous intercourse with the East.
The Europe north and west of this line is a different matter. In this area
literacy was never achieved in antiquity, but was imposed much later by
conquerors. It long resisted cultural influences from the south and east – or
at least did not offer a favourable reception to them – and it is for 2000 years
important not for its own sake but because of its relationship to other areas.
Its role was not entirely passive: the movements of its peoples, its natural
resources and skills all at times impinged marginally on events elsewhere.
But in 1000 BC – to take an arbitrary date – or even at the beginning of the
Christian era, Europe has little of its own to offer the world except its
minerals, and nothing which represents cultural achievement on the scale
reached by the Near East, India or China. Europe’s age was still to come;
hers would be the last great civilization to appear.
This was not because the continent’s natural endowment was
unfavourable. It contains a disproportionately large area of the world’s land
naturally suitable for cultivation. It would be surprising if this had not
favoured an early development of agriculture and the archaeological
evidence demonstrates this. The relative ease of simple agriculture in Europe
may have had a negative effect on social evolution; in the great river valleys
men had to work collectively to control irrigation and exploit the soil if they
were to survive, while in much of Europe an individual family could scratch
a living on its own. There is no need to fall into extravagant speculation
about the origins of western individualism in order to recognize that here is
something very distinctive and potentially very important.
Scholarly consensus now accepts that both agriculture and copper-
working (the earliest form of metallurgy) made their way into and across
Europe from Anatolia and the Near East. Thessaly and northern Greece had
farming communities a little after 7000 BC. By 5000 BC others existed as far
west as northern France and the Netherlands, and soon after appeared in the
British Isles. The main routes by which this spread occurred had been the
Balkans and their river valleys, but at the same time farming had been taken
up on Mediterranean islands and along the coasts of southern Europe as far
west as Andalucia. By 4000 BC copper was being worked in the Balkans. It
no longer seems likely, then, that either this technique or agriculture arose
spontaneously among Europeans, though they quickly imitated others who
brought these skills with them as migrants. It took thousands of years,
though, for Europe to acquire the major cereals from the Near East.

Most of the north-western and western parts of Europe were occupied in
about 3000 BC by peoples sometimes termed western Mediterranean, who
were gradually squeezed during the third millennium by others from the east.
By about 1800 BC the resulting cultures seem to have fragmented sufficiently
distinctly for us to identify among them the ancestors of the Celts, the most
important of prehistoric European peoples, a society of warriors rather than
traders or prospectors. They had wheeled transport. One enterprising group
had reached the British Isles. There is much disagreement about how far
Celtic influence is to be traced, but it will not much disfigure the truth if we
think of Europe divided in about 1800 BC into three groups of peoples. The
ancestors of the Celts then occupied most of modern France, Germany, the
Low Countries and upper Austria. To their east were the future Slavs, to the
north (in Scandinavia) the future Teutonic tribes. Outside Europe, in
northern Scandinavia and northern Russia, were the Finns, linguistically
non-Indo-European.
Except in the Balkans and Thrace, the movements of these peoples
affected the older centres of civilization only in so far as they affected access
to the resources of the areas into which they moved. This was above all a
matter of minerals and skills. As the demands of the Near East civilizations
grew, so did Europe’s importance. After the appearance of the first centres of
metallurgy in the Balkans developments in southern Spain, Greece and the
Aegean and central Italy had followed by 2000 BC. In the later Bronze Age,
metal-working was advanced to high levels even in places where no local
ores were available. We have here one of the earliest examples of the
emergence of crucial economic areas based on the possession of special
resources. Copper and tin shaped the penetration of Europe and also its
coastal and river navigation because these commodities were needed and
were only available in the Near East in small quantities. Europe was the
major primary producer of the ancient metallurgical world, as well as a
major manufacturer. Metal-working was carried to a high level and produced
beautiful objects long before that of the Aegean, but it is possibly an
argument against exaggerated awe about material factors in history that this
skill, even when combined with a bigger supply of metals after the collapse
of Mycenaean demand, did not release European culture for the achievement
of a full and complex civilization.
Ancient Europe had, of course, one other art form which remains
indisputably impressive. It is preserved in the thousands of megalithic

monuments to be found stretching in a broad arc from Malta, Sardinia and
Corsica, around through Spain and Brittany to the British Isles and
Scandinavia. They are not peculiar to Europe but are more plentiful there,
and appear to have been erected earlier – some in the fifth millennium BC –
there than in other continents. ‘Megalith’ is a word derived from the Greek
for ‘large stone’ and many of the stones used are very large indeed. Some of
these monuments are tombs, roofed and lined with slabs of stone, some are
stones standing singly, or in groups. Some of them are laid out in patterns
which run for miles across country; others enclose small areas like groves of
trees. The most complete and striking megalithic site is Stonehenge, in
southern England, whose creation is now thought to have taken about 900
years to its completion in about 2100 BC. What such places originally looked
like is hard to guess or imagine. Their modern austerity and weathered
grandeur may well be misleading; great places of human resort are not like
that when in use and it may be that the huge stones were daubed in ochres
and blood, hung with skins and fetishes. They may well often have looked
more like totem-poles than the solemn, brooding shapes we see today.
Except for the tombs, it is not easy to say what these works were for, though
it has been argued that some were giant clocks or huge solar observatories,
aligned to the rising and setting of sun, moon and stars at the major turning-
points of the astronomical year. Careful observation underlay building like
that, even if it fell far short in detail and precision to what was done by
astronomers in Babylon and Egypt.
These relics represent huge concentrations of labour and argue for well-
developed social organization. Stonehenge contains several blocks weighing
about fifty tons apiece and they had to be brought some eighteen miles to the
site before being erected. There are some eighty pieces of stone there
weighing about five tons which came 150 miles or so from the mountains of
Wales. The peoples who put up Stonehenge without the help of wheeled
vehicles, like those who built the carefully lined tombs of Ireland, the lines
of standing stones of Brittany or the dolmens of Denmark, were capable of
work on a scale approaching that of ancient Egypt, therefore, though without
its fineness or any means of recording their purposes and intentions except
these great constructions themselves. Such skill, coupled with the fact of the
monuments’ distribution in a long chain within short distances of the sea, has
suggested that their explanation might lie in what was learnt from wandering
stonemasons from the East, perhaps from Crete, Mycenae, or the Cyclades,

where the technique of dressing and handling such masses was understood.
But recent advances in dating have removed a plausible hypothesis;
megaliths were being put up in Brittany and western Iberia 4800–4000 BC
before any significant Mediterranean or Near Eastern building, Stonehenge
was probably complete before Mycenaean times, tombs in Spain and
Brittany antedate the pyramids, and Malta’s mysterious temples with their
huge carved blocks of building stone were there before 3000 BC. Nor do the
monuments have to form part of any one process of distribution or Atlantic
phenomenon. They may all have been achieved more or less in isolation by
four or five cultures made up of relatively small and simple agricultural
societies in touch with one another, and the motives and occasions of their
building may have been very different. Like its agriculture and metallurgy,
prehistoric Europe’s engineering and architecture arose independently of the
outside world.
For all their considerable achievements, the Europeans of ancient times
seem strangely passive and unresisting when they finally appear in regular
contact with advanced civilization. Their hesitations and uncertainties may
have resembled those of other primitive peoples meeting advanced societies
at later dates – eighteenth-century Africans, for example. But, in any case,
regular contact only began shortly before the Christian era. Before then, the
European peoples seem to have exhausted their energies in grappling with an
environment which, though easily worked to satisfy modest needs, required
the coming of iron to make it fully exploitable. Though far more advanced
than their contemporaries in America, or in Africa south of the Nile valley,
they never reached the stage of urbanization. Their greatest cultural
achievements were decorative and mechanical. At best, in their metallurgy,
the ancient Europeans serviced other civilizations’ needs. Beyond that, they
would only provide the stocks which would receive the impress of
civilization later.
Only one group of western barbarians had a more positive contribution to
make to the future. South of the olive-line an Iron Age people of central Italy
had already during the eighth century BC established trading contacts with
Greeks further south in Italy and with Phoenicia. We call them Villanovans,
after one of the sites where they lived. In the next 200 years they adopted
Greek characters for writing their language. By then they were organized in
city-states, producing art of high quality. These were the Etruscans. One of
their city-states would one day be known as Rome.

7
The End of the Old World
Of what was going on in India and China and its importance for the future,
the rulers of the Mediterranean and Near Eastern peoples knew hardly
anything. Some of them, listening to traders, may have had a dim perception
of a barbarian northern and north-western Europe. Of what happened beyond
the Sahara and of the existence of the Americas they knew nothing. Yet their
world was to expand rapidly in the first millennium BC and, equally and
perhaps even more obviously, it was to become more integrated as its
internal communications grew more complex and effective. A world of a few
highly distinctive and almost independent civilizations was giving way to
one where larger and larger areas shared in the same achievements of
civilization – literacy, government, technology, organized religion, city life –
and, under their influence, changed more and more rapidly as the interplay
of different traditions increased. It is important not to think of this in terms
too abstract or grandiose. It is not only registered by art and speculative
thought, but also by much that is more down-to-earth. Small things show it
as well as great. On the legs of the huge statues at Abu Simbel, 700 miles up
the Nile, sixth-century Greek mercenaries in the Egyptian army cut
inscriptions which recorded their pride in coming that far, just as 2500 years
later English county regiments would leave their badges and names cut into
the rocks of the Khyber Pass.
There is no clear chronological line to be drawn in this increasingly
complicated world. If one exists it has already been crossed several times
before we reach the eve of the classical age of the West. The military and
economic drive of the Mesopotamians and their successors, the movements
of the Indo-Europeans, the coming of iron and the spread of literacy
thoroughly mixed up the once-clear patterns of the Near East well before the
appearance of a Mediterranean civilization which is the matrix of our own.
Nevertheless, there is a sense in which it becomes manifest that an important
boundary was crossed somewhere early in the first millennium BC. The
greatest upheavals of the Völkerwanderung in the ancient Near East were
then over. The patterns set there in the late Bronze Age would still be

modified locally by colonization and conquest, but not for another thousand
years by big comings and goings of peoples. The political structures left
behind from antiquity would be levers of the next era of world history in a
zone which stretched from Gibraltar to the Indus. Civilization within this
area would more and more be a matter of interplay, borrowing and
cosmopolitanism. The framework for this was provided by the great political
change of the middle of the first millennium BC, the rise of a new power,
Persia, and the final collapse of the Egyptian and Babylonian-Assyrian
traditions.
The story of Egypt is the easiest to summarize, for it records little except
decline. It has been called a ‘Bronze Age anachronism in a world that
steadily moved away from her’ and its fate seems to be explained by an
inability to change or adapt. Egypt survived the first attacks of the iron-using
peoples and had beaten off the Peoples of the Sea at the beginning of the age
of turmoil. But this was the last big achievement of the New Kingdom:
thereafter the symptoms are unmistakably those of a machine running down.
At home, kings and priests disputed power while Egypt’s suzerainty beyond
its borders declined to a shadow. A period of rival dynasties was briefly
followed by a reunification which again took an Egyptian army to Palestine,
but by the end of the eighth century a dynasty of Kushite invaders had
established itself; in 671 BC it was ejected from Lower Egypt by the
Assyrians. Ashurbanipal sacked Thebes. As Assyrian power ebbed, there was
again an illusory period of Egyptian ‘independence’. By this time, evidence
of a new world towards which Egypt had to make more than political
concessions can be seen in the establishment of a school for Greek
interpreters and of a Greek trading enclave with special privileges at
Naucratis in the delta. Then again, in the sixth century, Egypt went down to
defeat first at the hands of the forces of Nebuchadnezzar (588 BC) and sixty
years later, before the Persians (525 BC), to become a province of an empire
which was to set boundaries for a new synthesis and would for centuries
dispute world supremacy with new powers appearing in the Mediterranean.
It was not quite the end of Egyptian independence, but from the fourth
century BC to the twentieth AD, she was to be ruled by foreigners or
immigrant dynasties and passes from view as an independent nation. The last
bursts of Egyptian recovery show little innate vitality. They express, rather,
temporary relaxations of the pressures upon her which always, in the end,

were followed by their resumption. The Persian threat was the last of these
and was fatal.
Once again, the starting-point is a migration. On the high plateau which is
the heart of modern Iran there were settlements in 5000 BC, but the word
‘Iran’ (which does not appear until about AD 600) in its oldest form means
‘land of the Aryans’ and it is somewhere around 1000 BC, with an irruption
of Aryan tribes from the north, that the history of the Persian empire begins.
In Iran, as in India, the impact of the Aryans was to prove ineffaceable and
founded a long-enduring tradition. Among their tribes two – especially
vigorous and powerful – have been remembered further west by their
biblical names as the Medes and Persians. The Medes moved west and
north-west to Media; their great age came at the beginning of the sixth
century, after they had overthrown Assyria, their neighbour. The Persians
went south towards the Gulf, establishing themselves in Khuzistan (on the
edge of the Tigris valley and in the old kingdom of Elam) and Fars, the
Persia of the ancients.
Oral tradition preserves a story of legendary kings more important for the
light it throws on later Persian attitudes to kingship than as history. It was
none the less from the Persian dynasty of the Achaemenids that there
descended the first king of a united Persia – anachronistic though this term
is. He was Cyrus, the conqueror of Babylon. In 549 BC he humbled the last
independent king of the Medes and thenceforth the boundaries of conquest
rolled outwards, swallowing Babylon and advancing through Asia Minor to
the sea, dropping down into Syria and Palestine. Only in the east (where he
was eventually killed fighting the Scythians) did Cyrus find it difficult to
stabilize his frontiers, though he crossed the Hindu Kush and set up some
sort of supremacy over the region of Gandhara, north of the Jhelum.
This was the largest empire the world had seen until that time. Its style
was different from its predecessors; the savagery of the Assyrians seems
muted. At least brutality was not celebrated in official art and Cyrus was
careful to respect the institutions and ways of his new subjects. The result
was a diverse empire, but a powerful one, commanding loyalties of a kind
lacking to its predecessors. There are some notable religious symptoms: the
protection of Marduk was solicited for Cyrus’s assumption of the
Babylonian kingship and at Jerusalem he launched the rebuilding of the
Temple. A Jewish prophet saw in his victories God’s hand, named him the
Lord’s anointed and gloated over the fate of the old enemy, Babylon:

‘Let now the astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand
up, and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.’ Isaiah 17: 13
Cyrus’s success owed much to the material resources of his kingdom. It
was rich in minerals, above all in iron, and in the high pastures of the valleys
lay a great reserve of horses and cavalrymen. Yet it is impossible to resist the
conclusion that sheer personal ability also counted for much; Cyrus lives as a
world-historical figure, recognized as such by other would-be conquerors
who were to strive in the next few centuries to emulate him. He based his
government upon provincial governors who were the forebears of the later
Persian satraps, and required from his subject provinces little beyond tribute
– usually in gold, which replenished the treasuries of Persia – and obedience.

Thus began the empire which, though with setbacks aplenty, provided for
nearly two centuries a framework for the Near East, sheltering a great
cultural tradition which grew to nourish itself both from Asia and Europe.
Large areas knew longer periods of peace under it than they had for
centuries and it was in many ways a beautiful and gentle civilization. Greeks
had already been told by Herodotus that the Persians loved flowers and there
are many things we could do without more easily than the tulip, which we
owe to them. Cyrus’s son added Egypt to the empire; yet he died before he
could deal with a pretender to the throne whose attempts encouraged Medes
and Babylonians to seek to recover their independence. The restorer of
Cyrus’s heritage was a young man who claimed Achaemenid descent,
Darius.
Darius (who reigned 522–486) did not achieve all he wished. His work,
none the less, rivalled that of Cyrus. His own inscription on the monument
recording his victories over rebels may be thought justified by what he did:
‘I am Darius the Great King, King of Kings, King in Persia’, a recitation of
an ancient title whose braggadocio he adopted. In the east the boundaries of
the empire were carried further into the Indus valley. In the west they
advanced to Macedonia, though they were checked there, and in the north
Darius failed, as Cyrus before him, to make much headway against the
Scythians. Inside the empire a remarkable work of consolidation was
undertaken. Decentralization was institutionalized with the division of the
empire into twenty provinces, each under a satrap who was a royal prince or
great nobleman. Royal inspectors surveyed their work and their control of
the machine was made easier by the institution of a royal secretariat to
conduct correspondence with the provinces, and Aramaic, the old lingua
franca of Assyrian empire, became the administrative language. It was well
adapted to the conduct of affairs because it was not written in cuneiform but
in 
the 
Phoenician 
alphabet. 
The 
bureaucracy 
rested 
on 
better
communications than any yet seen, for much of the provincial tribute was
invested in road-building. At their best these roads could convey messages at
200 miles a day.
A monument to this imperial achievement was to have been a great new
capital at Persepolis, where Darius himself was buried in a rock tomb cut
into the cliff face. Intended as a colossal glorification of the king, it remains
impressive even when it seems pompous. Persepolis was in the end a
collective creation; later kings added their palaces to it and embodied in it

the diversity and cosmopolitanism of the empire. Assyrian colossi, man-
headed bulls and lions guarded its gates as they had done those of Nineveh.
Up its staircases marched stone warriors bearing tribute; they are a little less
mechanical than the regimented Assyrians of earlier sculpture, but only a
little. The decorative columns recall Egypt, but it is an Egyptian device
transmitted through Ionian stone-cutters and sculptors. Greek details are to
be found also in the reliefs and decoration and a similar mixture of
reminiscences is to be found in the royal tombs not far away. They recall the
Valley of the Kings in their conception while their cruciform entrances speak
of something else. Cyrus’s own tomb, at Pasargadae, had also been marked
by Greek design. A new world is coming to birth.
These monuments fittingly express the continuing diversity and tolerance
of Persian culture. It was one always open to influence from abroad and
would continue to be. Persia took up not only the language of those it
conquered, but also sometimes their ideas. Vedic and Persian religion
mingled in Gandhara, where stood the Indian city the Greeks called Taxila,
but both, of course, were Aryan. The core of Persian religion was sacrifice
and centred on fire. By the age of Darius the most refined of its cults had
evolved into what has been called Zoroastrianism, a dualist religion
accounting for the problem of evil in terms of the struggle of a good with an
evil god. Of its prophet, Zoroaster, we know little, but it seems that he taught
his disciples to uphold the cause of the god of light with ritual and moral
behaviour; ahead lay a messianic deliverance, the resurrection of the dead
and life everlasting after judgement. This creed spread rapidly through
western Asia with Persian rule, even though it was probably never more than
the cult of a minority. It would influence Judaism and the oriental cults
which were to be part of the setting of Christianity; the angels of Christian
tradition and the notion of the hellfire which awaited the wicked both came
from Zoroaster.
It is too early to speak of the interplay of Asia and Europe, but there are
few more striking examples of the interplay of reciprocal influences which
marks the end of the ancient world. We can mark an epoch. Right across the
Old World, Persia suddenly pulled peoples into a common experience.
Indians, Medes, Babylonians, Lydians, Greeks, Jews, Phoenicians, Egyptians
were for the first time all governed by one empire whose eclecticism showed
how far civilization had already come. The era of civilization embodied in
distinct historical entities was over in the Near East. Too much had been

shared, too much diffused for the direct successors of the first civilizations to
be any longer the building blocks of world history. Indian mercenaries
fought in the Persian armies; Greeks in those of Egypt. City-dwelling and
literacy were widespread through the Near East. Men lived in cities around
much of the Mediterranean, too. Agricultural and metallurgical techniques
stretched even beyond that area and were to be spread further as the
Achaemenids transmitted the irrigation skill of Babylon to Central Asia and
brought rice from India to be planted in the Near East. When Asian Greeks
came to adopt a currency, it would be based on the sexagesimal numeration
of Babylon. The base of a future world civilization was in the making.

BOOK THREE
The Classical Mediterranean
Measured in years, more than half the story of civilization is over by about
500 BC. We are still nearer to that date than were the men who lived then to
their first civilized predecessors. In the three thousand or so years between
them, humanity had come a long way; however imperceptibly slow the
changes of daily life in them had been, there is an enormous qualitative gap
between Sumer and Achaemenid Persia. By the sixth century, a great period
of foundation and acceleration was already over. From the western
Mediterranean to the coasts of China a variety of cultural traditions had
established themselves. Distinct civilizations had taken root in them, some
firmly and deeply enough to survive into our own era. Some of them lasted,
moreover, with little but superficial and temporary change for hundreds or
even thousands of years. Virtually isolated, they contributed little to
mankind’s shared life outside their own areas. For the most part, even the
greatest centres of civilization were indifferent to what lay outside their
spheres for at least two thousand years after the fall of Babylon, except when
troubled by an occasional invasion. Only one of the civilizations already
discernible by the sixth century BC in fact showed much potential for
expanding beyond its cradle – that of the eastern Mediterranean. It was the
youngest of them but was to be very successful, lasting for over a thousand
years without a break in its tradition. Even this is less remarkable than what
it left behind, though, for it was the seedbed of almost all that played a
dynamic part in shaping the world we still inhabit.

1
The Roots of One World
The appearance of a new civilization in the eastern Mediterranean owed
much to older Near Eastern and Aegean traditions. From the start we
confront an amalgam of Greek speech, a Semitic alphabet, ideas whose roots
lie in Egypt and Mesopotamia, and reminiscences of Mycenae. Even when
this civilization matured it still showed the diversity of its origins. It was
never to be a simple, monolithic whole and in the end was very complex
indeed. For all that integrated it and gave it unity, it was always hard to
delimit, a cluster of similar cultures around the Mediterranean and Aegean,
their frontier zones blurring far outwards into Asia, Africa, barbarian Europe
and southern Russia. Even when its boundaries with them were clear, other
traditions always played upon Mediterranean civilization and received much
from it.
This civilization also varied in time. It showed greater powers of evolution
than any of its predecessors. Even when they had undergone important
political changes their institutions remained fundamentally intact, while
Mediterranean civilization displays a huge variety of transient political
forms and experiments. In religion and ideology, whereas other traditions
tended to develop without violent changes or breaks, so that civilization and
religion were virtually coterminous, the one living and dying with the other,
Mediterranean civilization begins in a native paganism and ends by
succumbing to an exotic import, Christianity, a revolutionized Judaism
which was to be the first global religion. This was a huge change and it
transformed this civilization’s possibilities of influencing the future.
Of all the forces making for its crystallization, the most fundamental was
the setting itself, the Mediterranean basin. It was both a collecting area and a
source; currents flowed easily into it from the lands of the old civilizations
and from this central reservoir they also flowed back to where they came
from and northwards into the barbarian lands. Though it is large and contains
a variety of peoples, this basin has well-defined general characteristics. Most
of its coasts are narrow plains behind which quickly rise fairly steep and

enclosing mountain ranges, broken by a few important river valleys. Those
who lived on the coasts tended to look along them and outward across the
sea, rather than behind them to their hinterland. This, combined with a
climate they all shared, made the spreading of ideas and techniques within
the Mediterranean natural for enterprising peoples.
The Romans, with reason, named the Mediterranean Mare Magnum, the
Great Sea. It was the outstanding geographical fact of their world, the centre
of classical maps. Its surface was a great uniting force for those who knew
how to use it, and by 500 BC maritime technology was advanced enough to
make this possible except in winter. Prevailing winds and currents
determined the exact routes of ships whose only power was provided by sails
or oars, but any part of the Mediterranean was accessible by water from any
other. The upshot was a littoral civilization, with a few languages spoken
widely within it. It had specialized trading centres, for exchanges of
materials were easy by sea, but the economy rested firmly on the growing of
wheat and barley, olives and vines, mainly for local consumption. The
metals increasingly needed by this economy could be brought in from
outside. The deserts to the south were held at bay further from the coast and
for perhaps thousands of years North Africa was richer than it now is, more
heavily wooded, better watered, and more fertile. The same sort of
civilization therefore tended to appear all around the Mediterranean. Such a
difference between Africa and Europe as we take for granted did not exist
until after AD 500.
The outward-looking peoples of this littoral civilization created a new
world. The great valley civilizations had not colonized, they had conquered.
Their peoples looked inwards to the satisfaction of limited aims under local
despots. Many later societies, even within the classical world, were to do the
same, but there is a discernible change of tempo and potential from the start,
and eventually Greeks and Romans grew corn in Russia, worked tin from
Cornwall, built roads into the Balkans and enjoyed spices from India and
silk from China.
About this world we know a great deal, partly because it left behind a
huge archaeological and monumental legacy. Much more important, though,
is the new richness of written material. With this, we enter the era of full
literacy. Among other things, we confront the first true works of history;
important as were to be the great folk records of the Jews, the narrations of a
cosmic drama built about the pilgrimage of one people through time, they

are not critical history. In any case, they, too, reach us through the classical
Mediterranean world. Without Christianity, their influence would have been
limited to Israel; through it, the myths they presented and the possibilities of
meaning they offered were to be injected into a world with 400 years of what
we can recognize as critical writing of history already behind it. Yet the work
of ancient historians, important as it is, is only a tiny part of the record. Soon
after 500 BC, we are in the presence of the first complete great literature,
ranging from drama to epic, lyric hymn, history and epigram, though what is
left of it is only a small part – seven out of more than a hundred plays by its
greatest tragedian, for example. Nevertheless, it enables us to enter the mind
of a civilization as we can enter that of none earlier.
Even for Greece, of course, the source of this literature, and a fortiori for
other and more remote parts of the classical world, the written record is not
enough on its own. The archaeology is indispensable, but it is all the more
informative because literary sources are so much fuller than anything from
the early past. The record they offer us is for the most part in Greek or Latin,
the two languages which provided the intellectual currency of Mediterranean
civilization. The persistence in English, the most widely used of languages
today, of so many words drawn from them is by itself almost enough
evidence to show this civilization’s importance to its successors (all seven
nouns in the last sentence but one, for example, are based on Latin words). It
was through writings in these languages that later men approached this
civilization and in them they detected the qualities which made them speak
of what they found simply as ‘ the classical world’.
This is a perfectly proper usage, provided we remember that the men who
coined it were heirs to the traditions they saw in it and stood, perhaps
trapped, within its assumptions. Other traditions and civilizations, too, have
had their ‘classical’ phases. What it means is that men see in some part of the
past an age setting standards for later times. Many later Europeans were to
be hypnotized by the power and glamour of classical Mediterranean
civilization. Some men who lived in it, too, thought that they, their culture
and times were exceptional, though not always for reasons we should now
find convincing. Yet it was exceptional; vigorous and restless, it provided
standards and ideals, as well as technology and institutions, on which huge
futures were to be built. In essence, the unity later discerned by those who
admired the Mediterranean heritage was a mental one.

Inevitably, there was to be much anachronistic falsification in some of the
later efforts to study and utilize the classical ideal, and much romanticization
of a lost age, too. Yet even when this is discounted, and when the classical
past has undergone the sceptical scrutiny of scholars, there remains a big
indissoluble residue of intellectual achievement which somehow places it on
our side of a mental boundary, while the great empires of Asia lie beyond it.
With whatever difficulty and possibility of misconstruction, the mind of the
classical age is recognizable and comprehensible in a way perhaps nothing
earlier can be. ‘This’, it has been well said, ‘is a world whose air we can
breathe.’
The role of the Greeks was pre-eminent in making this world and with
them its story must begin. They contributed more than any other single
people to its dynamism and to its mythical and inspirational legacy. The
Greek search for excellence defined for later nations what excellence was
and their achievement remains difficult to exaggerate. It is the core of the
process which made classical Mediterranean civilization.

2
The Greeks
In the second half of the eighth century BC, the clouds which had hidden the
Aegean since the end of the Bronze Age begin to part a little. Processes and
sometimes events become somewhat more discernible. There is even a date
or two, one of which is important in the history of a civilization’s self-
consciousness: in 776 BC, according to later Greek historians, the first
Olympian games were held. After a few centuries the Greeks would count
from this year as we count from the birth of Christ.
The people who gathered for that and later festivals of the same sort
recognized by doing so that they shared a culture. Its basis was a common
language; Dorians, Ionians, Aeolians all spoke Greek. What is more they had
done so for a long time; the language was now to acquire the definition
which comes from being written down, an enormously important
development, making possible, for example, the recording of the traditional
oral poetry, which was said to be the work of Homer. Our first surviving
inscription in Greek characters is on a jug of about 750 BC. It shows how
much the renewal of Aegean civilization owed to Asia. The inscription is
written in an adaptation of Phoenician script; Greeks were illiterate until
their traders brought home this alphabet. It seems to have been used first in
the Peloponnese, Crete and Rhodes; possibly these were the first areas to
benefit from the renewal of intercourse with Asia after the Dark Ages. The
process is mysterious and can probably never be recovered, but somehow the
catalyst which precipitated Greek civilization was contact with the East.
Who were the Greek-speakers who attended the first Olympiad? Though it
is the name by which they and their descendants are still known, they were
not called Greeks; that name was only given them centuries later by the
Romans. The word they would have used was the one we render in English
as ‘Hellenes’. First used to distinguish invaders of the Greek peninsula from
the earlier inhabitants, it became one applied to all the Greek-speaking
peoples of the Aegean. This was the new conception and the new name
emerging from the Dark Ages and there is more than a verbal significance to

it. It expressed a consciousness of a new entity, one still emerging and one
whose exact meaning would always remain uncertain. Some of the Greek-
speakers had in the eighth century already long been settled and their roots
were lost in the turmoil of the Bronze Age invasions. Some were much more
recent arrivals. None came as Greeks; they became Greeks by being there,
all around the Aegean. Language identified them and wove new ties between
them. Together with a shared heritage of religion and myth, it was the most
important constituent of being Greek, always and supremely a matter of
common culture.
Yet such ties were never politically effective. They were unlikely to make
for unity because of the size and shape of the theatre of Greek history, which
was not what we now call Greece, but was, rather, the whole Aegean. The
wide spread of Minoan and Mycenaean influences in earlier civilized times
had foreshadowed this, for between the scores of its islands and the shores
which closed about them it was easy to voyage during much of the year. The
explanation of the appearance of Greek civilization at all may well be largely
a matter of this geography. The past certainly counted for something, too, but
Minoan Crete and Mycenae probably left less to Greece than Anglo-Saxon
England left to a later Great Britain. The setting was more important than
history for it made possible a cluster of economically viable communities
using the same language and easily accessible not only to one another but to
older centres of civilization in the Near East. Like the old river valleys – but
for different reasons – the Aegean was a propitious place for civilization-
making.
Much of the Aegean was settled by Greeks as a consequence of limitations
and opportunities that they found on the mainland. Only in very small
patches did its land and climate combine to offer the chance of agricultural
plenty. For the most part, cultivation was confined to narrow strips of
alluvial plain, which had to be dry-farmed, framed by rocky or wooded hills;
minerals were rare, there was no tin, copper or iron. A few valleys ran direct
to the sea and communication between them was usually difficult. All this
inclined the inhabitants of Attica and the Peloponnese to look outwards to
the sea, on the surface of which movement was much easier than on land.
None of them, after all, lived more than forty miles from it.
This predisposition was intensified as early as the tenth century by a
growth of population which brought greater pressure on available land.
Ultimately this led to a great age of colonization; by the end of it, in the sixth

century, the Greek world stretched far beyond the Aegean, from the Black
Sea in the east to the Balearics, France and Sicily in the west and Libya in
the south. But this was the result of centuries during which forces other than
population pressure had also been at work. While Thrace was colonized by
agriculturalists looking for land, other Greeks settled in the Levant or south
Italy in order to trade, whether for the wealth it would bring or for the access
it offered to the metals they needed and could not find in Greece. Some
Black Sea Greek cities seem to be where they are because of trade, some
because of their farming potential. Nor were traders and farmers the only
agents diffusing Greek ways and teaching Greece about the outside world.
The historical records of other countries show us that there was a supply of
Greek mercenaries available from the sixth century (when they fought for
the Egyptians against the Assyrians) onwards. All these facts were to have
important social and political repercussions on the Greek homeland.

Despite serving in foreign armies, and quarrelling violently among
themselves, while cherishing the traditional and emotional distinctions of
Boeotian, or Dorian, or Ionian, the Greeks were always very conscious that
they were different from other peoples. This could be practically important;
Greek prisoners of war, for example, were in theory not to be enslaved,
unlike ‘barbarians’. This word expressed self-conscious Hellenism in its
essence but is more inclusive and less dismissive than it is in modern speech;
the barbarians were the rest of the world, those who did not speak an
intelligible Greek (dialect though it might be) but who made a sort of ‘bar-
bar’ noise which no Greek could understand. The great religious festivals of
the Greek year, when people from many cities came together, were occasions
to which only the Greek-speaker was admitted.
Religion was the other foundation of Greek identity. The Greek pantheon
is enormously complex, the amalgam of a mass of myths created by many
communities over a wide area at different times, often incoherent or even
self-contradictory until ordered by later, rationalizing minds. Some were
imports, like the Asian myth of golden, silver, bronze and iron ages. Local
superstition and belief in such legends was the bedrock of the Greek
religious experience. Yet it was a religious experience very different from
that of other peoples in its ultimately humanizing tendency. Greek gods and
goddesses, for all their supernatural standing and power, are remarkably
human. Much as they owed to Egypt and the East, Greek mythology and art
usually present their gods as better, or worse, men and women, a world away
from the monsters of Assyria and Babylonia, or from Shiva the many-armed.
This was a religious revolution; its converse was the implication that men
could be godlike. It is already apparent in Homer; perhaps he did as much as
anyone to order the Greek supernatural in this way and he does not give
much space to popular cults. He presents the gods taking sides in the Trojan
war in postures all too human and competing with one another; while
Poseidon harries the hero of the Odyssey, Athena takes his part. A later
Greek critic grumbled that Homer ‘attributed to the gods everything that is
disgraceful and blameworthy among men: theft, adultery and deceit’. It was
a world which operated much like the actual world.
The Iliad and Odyssey have already been touched upon because of the
light they throw on prehistory; they were also shapers of the future. They are
at first sight curious objects for a people’s reverence. The Iliad gives an
account of a short episode from a legendary long-past war; the Odyssey is

more like a novel, narrating the wandering of one of the greatest of all
literary characters, Odysseus, on his way home from the same struggle. That,
on the face of it, is all. But they came to be held to be something like sacred
books. If, as seems reasonable, the survival rate of early copies is thought to
give a true reflection of relative popularity, they were copied more
frequently than any other text of Greek literature. Much time and ink have
been spent on argument about how they were composed. It now seems most
likely that they took their present shape in Ionia slightly before 700 BC. The
Greeks referred to their author without qualification as ‘the poet’ (a
sufficient sign of his standing in their eyes) but some have found arguments
for thinking the two poems are the work of different men. For our purpose, it
is unimportant whether he was one author or not; the essential point is that
someone took material presented by four centuries of bardic transmission
and wove it into a form which acquired stability and in this sense these
works are the culmination of the era of Greek heroic poetry. Though they
were probably written down in the seventh century, no standard version of
these poems was accepted until the sixth; by then they were already regarded
as the authoritative account of early Greek history, a source of morals and
models, and the staple of literary education. Thus they became not only the
first documents of Greek self-consciousness, but the embodiment of the
fundamental values of classical civilization. Later they were to be even more
than this: together with the Bible, they became the source of western
literature.
Human though Homer’s gods might be, the Greek world had also a deep
respect for the occult and mysterious. It was recognized in such
embodiments as omens and oracles. The shrines of the oracles of Apollo at
Delphi or at Didyma in Asia Minor were places of pilgrimage and the
sources of respected if enigmatic advice. There were ritual cults which
practised ‘mysteries’ which re-enacted the great natural processes of
germination and growth at the passage of the seasons. Popular religion does
not loom large in the literary sources, but it was never wholly separated from
‘respectable’ religion. It is important to remember this irrational subsoil,
given that the achievements of the Greek élite during the later classical era
are so impressive and rest so importantly on rationality and logic; the
irrational was always there and in the earlier, formative period with which
this chapter is concerned, it loomed large.

The literary record and accepted tradition also reveal something, if
nothing very precise, of the social and (if the word is appropriate) political
institutions of early Greece. Homer shows us a society of kings and
aristocrats, but one already anachronistic when he depicted it. The title of
king sometimes lived on, and in one place, Sparta, where there were always
two kings at once, it had a shadowy reality which sometimes was effective,
but by historical times power had passed from monarchs to aristocracies in
almost all the Greek cities. The council of the Areopagus at Athens is an
example of the sort of restricted body which usurped the kingly power in
many places. Such ruling élites rested fundamentally on land; their members
were the outright owners of the estates, which provided not only their
livelihood but the surplus for the expensive arms and horses which made
leaders in war. Homer depicts such aristocrats behaving with a remarkable
degree of independence of his kings; this probably reflects the reality of his
own day. They were the only people who counted; other social distinctions
have little importance in these poems. Thersites is properly chastised for
infringing the crucial line between gentlemen and the rest.
A military aristocracy’s preoccupation with courage may also explain a
continuing self-assertiveness and independence in Greek public life;
Achilles, as Homer presents him, was as prickly and touchy a fellow as any
medieval baron. To this day a man’s standing in his peers’ eyes is what many
Greeks care about more than anything else and their politics have often
reflected this. It was to prove true during the classical age when time and
time again individualism wrecked the chances of cooperative action. The
Greeks were never to produce an enduring empire, for it could only have
rested on some measure of subordination of the lesser to the greater good, or
some willingnes to accept the discipline of routine service. This may have
been no bad thing, but meant that for all their Hellenic self-consciousness
the Greeks could not unite even their homeland into one state.
Below the aristocrats of the early cities were the other ranks of a still not
very complex society. Freemen worked their own land or sometimes for
others. Wealth did not change hands rapidly or easily until money made it
available in a form more easily transferred than land. Homer measured value
in oxen and seems to have envisaged gold and silver as elements in a ritual
of gift-giving, rather than as means of exchange. This was the background of
the later idea that trade and menial tasks were degrading; an aristocratic view
lingered on. It helps to explain why in Athens (and perhaps elsewhere)

commerce was long in the hands of metics, foreign residents who enjoyed no
civic privilege, but who provided the services Greek citizens would not
provide for themselves.
Slavery, of course, was taken for granted, although much uncertainty
surrounds the institution. It was clearly capable of many different
interpretations. In archaic times, if that is what Homer reflects, most slaves
were women, the prizes of victory, but the slaughter of male prisoners later
gave way to enslavement. Large-scale plantation slavery, such as that of
Rome or the European colonies of modern times, was unusual. Many Greeks
of the fifth century who were freemen owned one or two slaves and one
estimate is that about one in four of the population was a slave when Athens
was most prosperous. They could be freed; one fourth-century slave became
a considerable banker. They were also often well treated and sometimes
loved. One has become famous: Aesop. But they were not free and the
Greeks thought that absolute dependence on another’s will was intolerable
for a free man although they hardly ever developed this notion into positive
criticism of slavery. It would be anachronistic to be surprised at this. The
whole world outside Greece, too, was organized on the assumption that
slavery would go on. It was the prevailing social institution almost
everywhere well into Christian times and is not yet dead. It is hardly cause
for comment, therefore, that Greeks took it for granted. There was no task
that slavery did not sustain for them, from agricultural labour to teaching
(our word ‘pedagogue’ originally meant a slave who accompanied a well-
born boy to school). A famous Greek philosopher later tried to justify this
state of affairs by arguing that there were some human beings who were
truly intended to be slaves by nature, since they had been given only such
faculties as fitted them to serve the purposes of more enlightened men. To
modern ears this does not seem a very impressive argument, but in the
context of the way Greeks thought about nature and man there was more to it
than simple rationalization of prejudice.
Slaves may and foreign residents must have been among the many
channels by which the Greeks continued to be influenced by the Near East
long after civilization had re-emerged in the Aegean. Homer had already
mentioned the demiourgoi, foreign craftsmen who must have brought with
them to the cities of the Hellenes not only technical skill but the motifs and
styles of other lands. In later times we hear of Greek craftsmen settled in
Babylon and there were many examples of Greek soldiers serving as

mercenaries to foreign kings. When the Persians took Egypt in 525 BC,
Greeks fought on each side. Some of these men must have returned to the
Aegean, bringing with them new ideas and impressions. Meanwhile, there
was all the time a continuing commercial and diplomatic intercourse
between the Greek cities in Asia and their neighbours.
The multiplicity of day-to-day exchanges resulting from the enterprise of
the Greeks makes it very hard to distinguish native and foreign contributions
to the culture of archaic Greece. One tempting area is art; here, just as
Mycenae had reflected Asian models, so the animal motifs which decorate
Greek bronze work, or the postures of goddesses such as Aphrodite, recall
the art of the Near East. Later, the monumental architecture and statuary of
Greece was to imitate Egypt’s, and Egyptian antiquities shaped the styles of
the things made by Greek craftsmen at Naucratis. Although the final product,
the mature art of classical Greece, was unique, its roots lie far back in the
renewal of ties with Asia in the eighth century. What is not possible to
delineate quickly is the slow subsequent irradiation of a process of cultural
interplay which was by the sixth century working both ways, for Greece was
by then both pupil and teacher. Lydia, for example, the kingdom of the
legendary Croesus, richest man in the world, was Hellenized by its tributary
Greek cities; it took its art from them and, probably more important, the
alphabet, indirectly acquired via Phrygia. Thus Asia received again what
Asia had given.
Well before 500 BC, this civilization was so complex that it is easy to lose
touch with the exact state of affairs at any one time. By the standards of its
contemporaries, early Greece was a rapidly changing society, and some of its
changes are easier to see than others. One important development towards
the end of the seventh century seems to have been a second and more
important wave of colonization, often from the eastern Greek cities. Their
colonies were a response to agrarian difficulties and population pressure at
home. There followed an upsurge of commerce: new economic relationships
appearing as trade with the non-Greek world became easier. Part of the
evidence is an increased circulation of silver. The Lydians had been the first
to strike true coins – tokens of standard weight and imprint – and in the sixth
century money began to be widely used in both foreign and internal trade;
only Sparta resisted its introduction. Specialization became a possible
answer to land shortage at home. Athens assured the grain imports she
needed by specializing in the output of great quantities of pottery and oil;

Chios exported oil and wine. Some Greek cities became notably more
dependent on foreign corn, in particular, from Egypt or the Greek colonies of
the Black Sea.
Commercial expansion meant not only that land was no longer the only
important source of wealth, but also that more men could buy the land which
was so important in establishing status. This began a revolution both military
and political. The old Greek ideal of warfare had been single combat, a form
of fighting natural to a society whose warriors were aristocrats, riding or
driving to the field of battle to confront their equals while less well-armed
inferiors brawled about them. The new rich could afford the armour and
arms which provided a better military instrument, the regiment of ‘hoplites’,
the heavy-armed infantry who were to be for two centuries the backbone of
Greek armies and give them superiority. They would prevail by disciplined
cohesion, rather than by individual derring-do.
The hoplite wore helmet and body-armour and carried a shield. His main
weapon was the spear, which he did not throw, but with which he thrust and
stabbed in the mêlée which followed a charge by an ordered formation of
spearmen whose weight gave it its effect. Such tactics could work only on
relatively level ground, but it was such ground that was usually being
contested in Greek wars, for the agriculture on which a Greek city depended
could be devastated by seizure of the little plains of the valley floor where
most of its crops were grown. On such terrain, the hoplites would charge as a
mass, with the aim of sweeping away defenders by their impact. They
depended completely on their power to act as a disciplined unit. This both
maximized the effect of the charge and enabled them to prevail in the hand-
to-hand fighting which followed, because each hoplite had to rely for
protection on his right-hand side by the shield of his neighbour. To keep an
ordered line was therefore crucial. The Spartans were in particular admired
for their expertise in performing the preliminary evolutions which preceded
such an encounter and for retaining cohesion as a group once the scrimmage
had begun.
The ability to act collectively was the heart of the new warfare. Though
bigger numbers now took part in battles numbers were no longer all that
counted, as three centuries of Greek success against Asian armies were to
prove. Discipline and tactical skill began to matter more and they implied
some sort of regular training, as well as a social widening of the warrior

group. More men thus came to share in the power which comes from a near-
monopoly of the means of exercising force.
This was not the only crucial innovation of these years. It was then, too,
that the Greeks invented politics; the notion of running collective concerns
by discussion of possible choices in a public setting is theirs. The magnitude
of what they did lives on in the language we still use, for ‘politics’ and
‘political’ are terms derived from the Greek word for city, polis. This was the
framework of Greek life. It was much more than a mere agglomeration of
people living in the same place for economic reasons. That it was more is
shown by another Greek turn of speech: they did not speak of Athens doing
this, or Thebes doing that, but of the Athenians and the Thebans. Bitterly
divided though it might often be, the polis – or, as for convenience it can be
called, the city-state – was a community, a body of men conscious of shared
interests and common goals.
Such collective agreement was the essence of the city-state; those who did
not like the institutions of the one they lived in could look for alternatives
elsewhere. This helped to produce a high degree of cohesiveness, but also a
narrowness; the Greeks never transcended the passion for local autonomy
(another Greek word) and the city-state characteristically looked outwards
defensively and distrustfully. Gradually, it acquired its protecting gods, its
festivals and its liturgical drama, which connected living men with the past
and educated them in its traditions and laws. Thus it came to be an organism
living in time, spanning generations. But at its root lay the hoplite ideal of
disciplined, cooperative action in which men stood shoulder to shoulder with
their neighbours, relying on them to support them in the common cause. In
early days the citizen body – those, that is to say, who constituted the
politically effective community – was confined to the hoplites, those who
could afford to take their place in the ranks on which the defence of the city-
state depended. It is not surprising that in later times Greek reformers who
were worried about the results of political extremism would often turn
hopefully to the hoplite class when looking for a stable, settled foundation
for the polis.
At the roots of city-states lay also other facts: geography, economics,
kinship. Many of them grew up on very ancient sites, settled in Mycenaean
times; others were newer, but almost always the territory of a city-state was
one of the narrow valleys which could provide just enough for its
maintenance. A few were luckier: Sparta sat in a broad valley. A few were

specially handicapped: the soil of Attica was poor and Athens would have to
feed its citizens on imported grain in consequence. Dialect intensified the
sense of independence latent in the mountains separating a city from its
neighbours. In it was preserved a sense of common tribal origin which lived
on in the great public cults.
By the beginning of historical times these forces had already generated
intense feelings of community and individuality which made it virtually
impossible for Greeks to transcend the city-state: a few shadowy leagues and
confederations did not count for much. Within the city the involvement of
citizens in its life was close; we might find it excessive. Yet because of its
scale the city-state could do without elaborate bureaucracies; the citizen
body, always much smaller than the whole population, could always
assemble at one meeting place. There was no likelihood that a city-state
could or would aspire to a minute bureaucratic regulation of affairs; anything
like this would probably have been beyond the capacity of its institutions. If
we judge by the evidence of Athens, the state of which we know most
because it recorded so much in stone, the distinction between administration,
judgement and law-making was not as we know it; as in the Europe of the
Middle Ages, an executive act might be clothed as a decision of a court
interpreting established law. Lawcourts were, formally speaking, only
sections of the assembly of the citizens.
The size and qualification of the membership of this body determined the
constitutional character of the state. Upon it depended, more or less, the
authorities of day-to-day government, whether magistrates or courts. There
was nothing like the modern permanent civil service. True, it is still risky to
generalize about such matters. There were over 150 city-states and about
many of them we know nothing; of most of the rest we know only a little.
Obviously there were important differences between the ways in which they
ran their affairs; in the fourth century BC, Aristotle made a great collection of
their constitutions and there would not have been much point in a political
scientist doing this unless they were significantly different from one another.
But the detail of what went on is hard to discern, even in the few cases
where we have good information.
As for the history of political forms, the origins are usually buried in
legends as informative as the story of Hengist and Horsa to the historian of
England. Even Homer is unhelpful about the city-state; he hardly mentions it
because his subject is warrior bands. Yet when the historical age dawns the

city-state is there, ruled by aristocracies. The forces which determined the
broad lines of its later evolution have already been touched upon. New
wealth meant new men, and the new men battered away at the existing élites
to get admission to citizenship. The aristocracies which had supplanted the
kings themselves became objects of rivalry and attack. The new men sought
to replace them with governments less respectful of traditional interests; the
result was an age of rulers the Greeks called tyrants. They were often
moneyed, but their justification was their popularity; they were strong men
who set aside the aristocracies. The later sinister connotations of the word
‘tyrant’ did not then exist; many tyrants must have seemed benevolent
despots. They brought peace after social struggles probably intensified by a
new crisis arising from pressure on land. Peace favoured economic growth,
as did the usually good relations the tyrants enjoyed with one another. The
seventh century was their golden age. Yet the institution did not long
survive. Few tyrannies lasted two generations. In the sixth century the
current turned almost everywhere towards collective government;
oligarchies, constitutional governments, even incipient democracies began to
emerge.
Athens was an outstanding example. For a long time it seems that Attica,
though poor, had sufficient land for Athens to escape the social pressures
which in other states led to the colonization movement. In other ways, too,
her economy early reflected a special vigour; even in the eighth century her
pottery suggests that Athens was something of a commercial and artistic
leader. In the sixth, though, she too was racked by conflict between rich and
poor. A soon legendary law-giver, Solon, forbade the enslavement of debtors
by wealthy creditors (which had the effect of leading men to turn to greater
dependence on chattel slaves, since debt bondage could no longer guarantee
a labour force). Solon also encouraged farmers to specialize. Oil and wine
(and their containers) became staple Athenian exports and grain was kept at
home. Simultaneously, a series of reforms (also attributed to Solon) gave
equality with the old landed class to the newly enriched and provided for a
new popular council to prepare business for the ecclesia, the general
assembly of all citizens.
Such changes did not at once quiet Athens’ divisions. An age of tyrants
only closed with the expulsion of the last in 510 BC. Then there at last began
to operate the institutions whose paradoxical outcome was to be the most
democratic government in Greece, though one over a state which held more

slaves than any other. All political decisions were taken in principle by
majority vote of the ecclesia (which also elected the important magistrates
and military commanders). Ingenious arrangements provided for the
organization of the citizens in units which would prevent the emergence of
sectional factions representing city-dwellers as against farmers or merchants.
It was the beginning of a great age, one of prosperity, when Athens would
consciously foster festivals and cults looking beyond the city and offered
something to all Greeks. This was something of a bid for leadership.
Much has been made of the contrast between Athens and its great rival,
Sparta. Unlike Athens, Sparta met the pressures upon it not by modifying its
institutions but by resisting change. Sparta embodied the most conservative
approach to the problem, solving it for a long time by rigid social discipline
at home and by conquest among its neighbours, which allowed it to meet the
demand for land at others’ expense. A very early consequence was a
fossilizing of the social structure. So tradition-bound was Sparta that it was
alleged that its legendary law-giver, Lycurgus, had even forbidden the
writing down of its laws; they were driven home in the minds of the
Spartiates by a rigorous training that all underwent in youth, boys and girls
alike.
Sparta had no tyrants. Its effective government appears to have been
shared between a council of old men and five magistrates called ‘ephors’,
while the two hereditary kings had special military powers. These oligarchs
were in the last resort answerable to the assembly of the Spartiates (of whom
according to Herodotus, there were early in the fifth century about 5000).
Sparta was, therefore, a large aristocracy whose origin, ancient writers
agreed, was the hoplite class. Society remained agricultural; no commercial
class was allowed to appear and when the rest of Greece took up the use of
money, around 600 BC, Sparta stood out and permitted only an iron currency
for internal use. Spartiates were not supposed to own silver or gold until the
fourth century. Sparta even stood aside from the colonizing movement and
launched only one enterprise of this sort.
This produced a sort of militarized egalitarianism often admired by later
puritans, and an atmosphere strongly suggestive, for good and ill, of the
aspirations of an old-fashioned and high-minded boarding school. Though
the passing of time and the position of kings slightly softened their practice,
Spartiates knew no great distinctions of wealth or comfort. Until well into
classical times they avoided dressing differently and ate at communal

messes. Their conditions of life were, in a word, ‘spartan’, reflecting the
idealization of military virtues and strict discipline. The details are often
strikingly unpleasant as well as curious. For the marriage ceremony, for
example, the bride’s hair was cropped and she was dressed as a boy. This
was followed by a simulated rape, after which the couple did not live
together, but the man continued to live with his companions in a male
dormitory and eat in messes with them. It is interesting that Sparta exported
nursemaids to other Greek states (later parallels will occur to the reader). It
had no artistic or cultural achievement to speak of and its internal politics
remain mysterious.

Possibly Spartan politics were simplified or muted by Sparta’s gravest
problem, the division between the citizen commune and the rest. The bulk of
the inhabitants of the Spartan state were not citizens. Some were freemen,
but most were helots, serf-like workers, bound to the land, who shared with
the free peasants the task of producing the food consumed at the Spartiates’
communal meals. Originally the helot population may have been the native
population enslaved by the Dorian invasions, but they were, like later serfs,
tied to land rather than being the chattels of individual owners. Certainly
their number was later swollen by conquest, above all by the annexation in
the eighth century of the plain of Messenia, which disappeared from Greek
history as an independent state for more than 300 years. As a result, a cloud
hung over the Spartan achievement, the fear of a helot revolt, and it was
remarked by other Greeks. It hobbled the Spartans in their relations with
other states. Increasingly they feared to have their army abroad lest its
absence should tempt revolt at home. Sparta was always on the alert and the
feared enemy was at home.
Sparta and Athens were to quarrel fatally in the fifth century and this has
led them to be seen always as the poles of the political world of ancient
Greece. They were not, of course, the only models available, and herein lies
one of the secrets of the Greek achievement. It would draw upon a richness
of political experience and data far greater than anything seen in the world
until this time. This experience would provide the first systematic reflections
upon the great problems of law, duty and obligation which have exercised
men’s minds ever since, largely in terms set by the classical Greeks. In pre-
classical times, speculation on such themes is almost non-existent. The
weight of custom and the limitations of local experience sufficiently explain
this.
The city-state was the shared inheritance and experience of the Greeks,
but they knew of other types of political organization through contacts made
in the course of trade and because of the exposed nature of many of their
own settlements. The Greek world had frontier regions where conflict was
likely. In the west they once seemed to be pushing ahead in an almost
limitless expansion, but two centuries of striking advance came to an end
round about 550 BC, when Carthaginian and Etruscan power prescribed a
limit. The first settlements – once again, at sites sometimes used centuries
earlier by Minoans and Mycenaeans – show that trade mattered as much as
agriculture in their foundation. Their main strength lay in Sicily and in

southern Italy, an area significantly to be called Magna Graecia in later
classical times. The richest of these colonies was Syracuse, founded by
Corinthians in 733 BC and eventually the dominating Greek state in the west.
It had the best harbour in Sicily. Beyond this colonial area, settlements were
made in Corsica and southern France (at Massilia, the later Marseilles) while
some Greeks went to live among the Etruscans and Latins of central Italy.
Greek products have turned up even as far afield as Sweden and Greek style
has been seen in sixth-century fortifications in Bavaria. More impalpable
influence is hard to pin down, but a Roman historian believed that Greek
example first civilized the barbarians of what was later to be France and set
them not only to tilling their fields, but to cultivating the vine. If so, posterity
owes Greek commerce a debt indeed.
This vigorous expansion seems to have provoked Phoenician envy and
imitation. It led the Phoenicians to found Carthage and the Carthaginians to
seize footholds in western Sicily. Eventually they were able to close down
Greek trade in Spain. Yet they could not turn the Greek settlers out of Sicily
any more than the Etruscans could drive them from Italy. The decisive battle
in which the Syracusans routed a Carthaginian force was in 480 BC.
This was a date of even greater significance for Greek relations with Asia,
where the Greek cities of Asia Minor had often been at loggerheads with
their neighbours. They had suffered much from the Lydians until they came
to terms with the Lydian king, Croesus of legendary wealth, and paid him
tribute. Before this, Greece already influenced Lydian fashions; some of
Croesus’s predecessors had sent offerings to the shrine at Delphi. Now the
Hellenization of Lydia went even more quickly ahead. None the less, a much
more formidable opponent loomed up even further east: Persia.
The Greek struggle with Persia is the climax of the early history of Greece
and the inauguration of its classical age. Because the Greeks made so much
of their long conflict with the Persians it is easy to lose sight of the many ties
that linked the contestants. The Persian fleets – and to a lesser extent,
Persian armies – launched against the Peloponnese had thousands of Greeks,
mainly from Ionia, serving in them. Cyrus had employed Greek stone-cutters
and sculptors and Darius had a Greek physician. Probably the war did as
much to create as to feed antagonism, however deep the emotional revulsion
proclaimed by the Greeks for a country which treated its kings like gods.
The origins of the war lay in the great expansion of Persia under the
Achaemenids. In about 540 BC, the Persians overthrew Lydia (and that was

the end of Croesus, who was supposed to have provoked the assault by an
incautious interpretation of an utterance of the Delphic oracle, which said
that if he went to war with Persia he would destroy a great empire, but not
which one). This brought Greeks and Persians face to face; elsewhere, the
tide of Persian conquest rolled on. When the Persians took Egypt they
damaged Greek traders’ interests there. Next, the Persians crossed to Europe
and occupied the cities of the coast as far west as Macedon; across the
Danube and they failed, and soon retired from Scythia. At this point there
was something of a pause. Then, in the first decade of the fifth century, the
Asian Greek cities revolted against Persian suzerainty, encouraged, perhaps,
by Darius’s failure against the Scythians. The mainland cities, or some of
them, decided to help. Athens and Eretria sent a fleet to Ionia. In the
subsequent operations the Greeks burnt Sardis, the former capital of Lydia
and the seat of the western satrapy of the Persian empire. But the revolt
failed in the end and left the mainland cities facing an enraged opponent.
Things did not usually happen very quickly in the ancient world, and
large-scale expeditions still take a long time to prepare, but almost as soon as
the Ionian revolt was crushed the Persians sent a fleet against the Greeks; it
was wrecked off Mount Athos. A second attempt, in 490 BC, sacked Eretria
but then came to grief at the hands of the Athenians in a battle whose name
has become legendary: Marathon.
Although this was an Athenian victory, the leader in the next phase of the
struggle with Persia was Sparta, the strongest of the city-states on land. Out
of the Peloponnesian League, an alliance whose origins had been domestic
in that its aim had been to assure Sparta’s future by protecting her from the
need to send her army abroad, there devolved upon Sparta something like
national leadership. When the Persians came again, ten years later, almost all
the Greek states accepted this – even Athens, whose strengthening of her
fleet had made her the preponderant power of the League at sea.
The Greeks said, and no doubt believed, that the Persians came again (in
480 BC, through Thrace) in millions; if, as now seems more likely, there were
in fact well under a hundred thousand of them (including thousands of
Greeks), this was still an overwhelming enough disproportion for the
defenders of the Greek cities. The Persian army moved slowly along the
coast and down towards the Peloponnese, accompanied by a huge fleet
which hung on its flanks. Yet the Greeks had important advantages in their

better-armed and trained heavy infantry, a terrain which nullified the Persian
cavalry superiority, and morale.
This time the crucial battle was at sea. It followed another legendary
episode, the overwhelming of Leonidas the Spartan king and his three
hundred at the pass of Thermopylae, after which Attica had to be abandoned
to the Persians. The Greeks retired to the isthmus of Corinth, their fleet
massed in the bay of Salamis near Athens. Time was on their side. It was
autumn; a winter which would catch the Persians unprepared would soon be
coming and Greek winters are severe. The Persian king threw his numerical
advantage away by deciding to engage the Greek fleet in the narrow waters
of Salamis. His fleet was shattered and he began a long retreat to the
Hellespont. The next year the army he had left behind was defeated at
Plataea and the Greeks won another great sea fight, at Mycale on the other
side of the Aegean, on the same day. This was the end of the Persian War.
It was a great moment in Greek history, perhaps the greatest, and Sparta
and Athens had covered themselves with glory. The liberation of Asiatic
Greece followed. It opened an age of huge self-confidence for the Greeks.
Their outward drive was to continue until its culmination in a Macedonian
empire a century and a half later. The sense of Greek identity was at its
height, and men looking back at these heroic days were to wonder later if
some great chance to unite Greece as a nation had not then been missed for
ever. Perhaps, too, it was something more, for in the repulse of an Asian
despot by Greek freemen lay the seed of a contrast often to be drawn by later
Europeans, though in the fifth century it existed only in the minds of a few
Greeks. But myths breed future realities and centuries later other men would
look back anachronistically to Marathon and Salamis, seeing them as the
first of many victories in which Europe confronted barbarism and won.
